IOG100
Primary & Secondary Distribution

with SAP for Oil
SAP for Industries - SAP for Oil and Gas

Date
Training Center
Instructors

Education Website

Participant Handbook
Course Version: 2006 Q2
Course Duration: 5 Day(s)
Material Number: 50083769

An SAP course - use it to learn, reference it for work



Copyright

Copyright © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or for any purpose
without the express permission of SAP AG. The information contained herein may be changed
without prior notice.

Some software products marketed by SAP AG and its distributors contain proprietary software
components of other software vendors.

Trademarks

ï MicrosoftÆ, WINDOWSÆ, NTÆ, EXCELÆ, WordÆ, PowerPointÆ and SQL ServerÆ are
registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation.

ï IBMÆ, DB2Æ, OS/2Æ, DB2/6000Æ, Parallel SysplexÆ, MVS/ESAÆ, RS/6000Æ, AIXÆ,
S/390Æ, AS/400Æ, OS/390Æ, and OS/400Æ are registered trademarks of IBM Corporation.

ï ORACLEÆ is a registered trademark of ORACLE Corporation.
ï INFORMIXÆ-OnLine for SAP and INFORMIXÆ Dynamic ServerTM are registered

trademarks of Informix Software Incorporated.
ï UNIXÆ, X/OpenÆ, OSF/1Æ, and MotifÆ are registered trademarks of the Open Group.
ï CitrixÆ, the Citrix logo, ICAÆ, Program NeighborhoodÆ, MetaFrameÆ, WinFrameÆ,

VideoFrameÆ, MultiWinÆ and other Citrix product names referenced herein are trademarks
of Citrix Systems, Inc.

ï HTML, DHTML, XML, XHTML are trademarks or registered trademarks of W3CÆ, World
Wide Web Consortium, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

ï JAVAÆ is a registered trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc.
ï JAVASCRIPTÆ is a registered trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc., used under license for

technology invented and implemented by Netscape.
ï SAP, SAP Logo, R/2, RIVA, R/3, SAP ArchiveLink, SAP Business Workflow, WebFlow, SAP

EarlyWatch, BAPI, SAPPHIRE, Management Cockpit, mySAP.com Logo and mySAP.com
are trademarks or registered trademarks of SAP AG in Germany and in several other countries
all over the world. All other products mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of
their respective companies.

Disclaimer

THESE MATERIALS ARE PROVIDED BY SAP ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND SAP EXPRESSLY
DISCLAIMS ANY AND ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR APPLIED, INCLUDING
WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE, WITH RESPECT TO THESE MATERIALS AND THE SERVICE,
INFORMATION, TEXT, GRAPHICS, LINKS, OR ANY OTHER MATERIALS AND PRODUCTS
CONTAINED HEREIN. IN NO EVENT SHALL SAP BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR PUNITIVE DAMAGES OF ANY
KIND WHATSOEVER, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION LOST REVENUES OR LOST
PROFITS, WHICH MAY RESULT FROM THE USE OF THESE MATERIALS OR INCLUDED
SOFTWARE COMPONENTS.

g2007620103544



About This Handbook
This handbook is intended to complement the instructor-led presentation of this
course, and serve as a source of reference. It is not suitable for self-study.

Typographic Conventions
American English is the standard used in this handbook. The following
typographic conventions are also used.

Type Style Description

Example text Words or characters that appear on the screen. These
include field names, screen titles, pushbuttons as well
as menu names, paths, and options.
Also used for cross-references to other documentation
both internal (in this documentation) and external (in
other locations, such as SAPNet).

Example text Emphasized words or phrases in body text, titles of
graphics, and tables

EXAMPLE TEXT Names of elements in the system. These include
report names, program names, transaction codes, table
names, and individual key words of a programming
language, when surrounded by body text, for example
SELECT and INCLUDE.

Example text Screen output. This includes file and directory names
and their paths, messages, names of variables and
parameters, and passages of the source text of a
program.

Example text Exact user entry. These are words and characters that
you enter in the system exactly as they appear in the
documentation.

<Example text> Variable user entry. Pointed brackets indicate that you
replace these words and characters with appropriate
entries.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. iii



About This Handbook IOG100

Icons in Body Text
The following icons are used in this handbook.

Icon Meaning

For more information, tips, or background

Note or further explanation of previous point

Exception or caution

Procedures

Indicates that the item is displayed in the instructor's
presentation.

iv © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Contents
Course Overview ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .viii

Course Goals .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
Course Objectives ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii

Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Enterprise structures and Logistics ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2

Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading..... . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Global Trade Management .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management .. . . . . . . . 81
Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104
Bulk Operational Inventory Management .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .125

Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound
Distribution) .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161

Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution .. . . . . . . . . .162

Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal
Movements ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219

Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .221
Refinery processing .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .259
Reporting... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .291

Unit 6: Exchange Agreements ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
Exchange Operations .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .304

Unit 7: Secondary Distribution ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
Transportation and Shipment Costing... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .347

Unit 8: Service Station Retailing ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 399
Service Station Fuel Management.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .401
Service Station Retailing .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .430
Meter and Dip Reading Management ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .458
Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing .. . . . . . . .501

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. v



Contents IOG100

Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence..... . . . . . . . . . . 545
Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .546

vi © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Course Overview
This course will provide an instructional overview of the processes Supply,
Refinery and Trading, organizational structures, master data and reports that
support the basic processes in Oil and Gas industry. Throughout this course, you
will have the opportunity to enhance your skills in system functions by completing
exercises at the end of each lesson. The exercises are based on the requirements
of the case companies, an International company and a Local affiliate company,
which are completing SAP for Oil&Gas implementation. You will join the
implementation team as a business analyst. The exercises will therefore ask you to
check, test and analyze various aspects of the industry supply chain and refinery
processes. Have fun in your new position!
The first unit gives you a brief overview of the organization structures in SAP
that are relevant to build up Oil company structures in the system.
The second unit deals with functions within Physical Oil and Gas Commodity
Trading, such as deal capture, trade management and trading commodity pricing.
The third unit covers business scenario International Export/Import Operations
(raw material). You become acquainted with processing of supply contracts
in sales and purchasing cycles. Next step is Bulk scheduling and operation
which is performed via Transportation and Scheduling Workbench (TSW) and
considers voyage scheduling, nomination and ticket processing. The scenario also
covers Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI) and interaction between Materials
Management and operations in TSW. Freight management part includes basics of
Transportation and Distribution (TD)
The fourth unit describes scenario Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound
Distribution). The steps of the scenario covers bulk pipeline scheduling, TSW
master data and operational inventory management.
The fifth unit describes silo management, refining, internal movements. The
scenario goes trough Hydrocarbon Inventory Management (HPM) to Refinery
processing and Reporting of internal movements.
The sixth unit covers business scenarios of exchange business and operations with
finished products. Within exchange business the scenario includes, master data,
agreements, operations management and settlement.
The seventh unit describes secondary distribution of finished products and covers
the whole range of functions in Transportation and Distribution (TD): basics,
master data of transportation units, shipment scheduling, loading and discharging,
shipment costs calculation and settlement.
The eighth unit is about processes based on service station retailing. It contains
fuel pricing, fuel stock management, tank management, payment settlement
(payment card, cash, fuel card) and dealer settlement

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. vii



Course Overview IOG100

The ninth unit consists of Reporting and Analytics for bulk supply chain. It is
described how to retrieve and analyze relevant for supply, refinery and trading
information using various reporting tools

Target Audience
This course is intended for the following audiences:

ï Members of the project team
ï Consultants

Course Prerequisites
Required Knowledge
ï TIOG10 Oil&Gas Business Processes and Organization

Recommended Knowledge
ï SCM500 or comparable knowledge in the area of Processes in External

Procurement
ï SCM600 or comparable knowledge in the area of Processes in Sales and

Distribution
ï SCM601 Processes in Logistics Execution

Course Goals
This course will prepare you to:

ï Recognize and execute the basic processes within SAP for OIL&GAS
in various business scenarios. Gain conceptual information and hands-on
experience of SAP for OIL&GAS

ï Understand and maintain the master data used in the basic processes
ï Recognize and understand the interaction between modules involved in

business scenarios.
ï Gain understanding on application area of SAP for OIL&GAS functions (the

course does not cover customizing of the system).

Course Objectives
After completing this course, you will be able to:

ï Explain the realization in SAP for OIL&GAS basic functions of Supply,
Transmission & Trading and Refining.

ï Understand the purpose and assignment of enterprise structures required
for processing documents

viii © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Course Overview

ï Create and process the documents used in the various industry business
scenarios.

ï Create and maintain all relevant master data.
ï Execute and change layout of basic reports and lists relevant to business

scenarios.

SAP Software Component Information
The information in this course pertains to the following SAP Software Components
and releases:

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. ix



Course Overview IOG100

x © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 1
Oil Company Structure and Logistics

Unit Overview
This unit gives brief overview of the typical structure and organizational levels of
International Oil Company. At the organizational level of Local Oil Company the
structure of Supply & Distribution Department is carefully explained. The unit
describes organization elements (units) and master data used in the modeling
process of company structure using standpoint of Primary and Secondary
Distribution with SAP for Oil&Gas.

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Explain the structure and organizational levels within an international oil
company

ï Explain the logistics and supply chain in a local oil company
ï Name the organizational elements in the logistics process
ï Define the enterprise structures in SAP for Oil&Gas

Unit Contents
Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2

Exercise 1: Enterprise Structures in SAP for Oil&GAS.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 1



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain structure and organizational levels within an international
oil company. You will study the organization elements and master data used in the
modeling process of a company structure. The lesson also gives you information
on the relationship between organizational elements and master data in logistics.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Explain the structure and organizational levels within an international oil

company
ï Explain the logistics and supply chain in a local oil company
ï Name the organizational elements in the logistics process
ï Define the enterprise structures in SAP for Oil&Gas

Business Example
One of the initial steps of an implementation project is modeling the company's
organizational structure. The project team has to build up the organizational
structure and master data in an international oil company and the German oil
company VOIL DE in compliance with SAP for Oil&Gas Primary and Secondary
Distribution.

Supply Chain Organizations
Organization varies by company and within a company structure, supply chain
management (SCM) may be referred to as supply, refining & supply, supply &
distribution, or refining & marketing, depending on the department.
Here we willl use the term supply & distribution (S&D) for the department with
the major supply chain management process that covers crude, feed stocks,
semi-finished products (blend stocks and rerun products), and ñ in terms of
production and distribution ñ finished products. Supply & distribution usually
needs the full scope of SCM.

2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

Figure 1: S&Din an International Oil Company

In most oil companies, SCM is also applicable within individual departments for
specific product lines, such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG); lubes (including
or excluding base oil); jet fuels (aviation gasoline, kerosene, and lubes); asphalt
(regular or oxidized); or coke (regular or calcinate). There may be also SCM for
specific customers handled by individual departments, including industrial and
wholesale customers (usually heating oil, diesel, or heavy fuel oil) or marine
(diesel, bunker fuel, or lubes). The scope of SCM within these departments varies
according to specific business requirements.
There may be interactions, for example, Aviation and Marine just sell and S&D
and Lubes provide the products. Here there is a shared SCM process. In many
companies, Aviation and Marine are organized globally with their own global
sales systems. Companies may decide to interface these systems to capture
local movements and inventory in SAP. Billing may be captured as well, that is,
accounting is handled in SAP, and order taking and scheduling are outside of SAP.

Subdivisions in a Typical S&D Department
A typical S&D department is divided into business units.
Planning and optimization
This unit is responsible for the different planning cycles (yearly, monthly, and
weekly for day-to-day business; long-term for strategic decisions). It may include
planning optimization but usually only partially, for example, refinery production

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 3



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

or lubes blending. This business unit could also be responsible for product
exchange and term contract (purchase and sale) economics. Guidance is given on
inventory handling, minimum/maximum, and targets.
Trading
Trading is responsible for purchases and sales as per planning signals, using
term contracts plus necessary spot deals to balance. Depending on the company
philosophy, third-party trading is used to optimize, with or without hedging to
secure wet deals. Usually, there is also a close link to upstream for production
trading, that is, sales of surplus production or sale and purchase to optimize
supplies (for example, to minimize transportation costs).
Scheduling
Scheduling handles daily operations within planning cycles (usually weekly and
monthly cycles). This includes tanker, barge, rail, truck, and pipeline programming
for crude, feed stocks, semi-finished products, base oil transfers, purchases,
and sales (primary distribution). The resulting slates (basically shopping lists)
bridge trading and transportation, that is, they are the basis for all nominations to
suppliers (or vendors), customers, terminals, inspection companies, and so on.

Figure 2: S&D Departments and Responsibilities

Transportation

4 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

Transportation is responsible for negotiation of transportation term contracts to
cover basic transportation requirements. This covers programming of available
transportation units based on slates from scheduling; in (or out) chartering
of capacity to balance coverage; safety and environmental issues; and vessel
screening (ship, crew safety status, technical condition, and ship safety record).
Terminal Operations (including refinery distribution terminals)
Terminal operations handles coordination of loading and discharging of different
transportation units (berth/loading rack scheduling). Terminal maintenance
includes tanks, racks, berths, pipes, gauging systems, and so on. Terminal
operations is also responsible for posting of issues and receipts and physical
inventory measurements, and gain/loss management.
Administration
Administration is responsible for term and spot contract administration (purchase,
sale, exchange); claim handling (contract pricing, product gain/loss, demurrage );
and inventory management (reconciliation and physical inventory adjustments).

Note: Inventory management may be handled by controllers rather
then S&D. This is a common Change Management issue in SAP
implementations.

The same structure is applicable (either fully or partially) to other departments,
such as Lubes or industrial and wholesale customers.

S&D Busines Partners
The supply & distribution department interacts daily with business partners
represented by internal and external parties.
External: Third Party

Crude oil supplier, location Saudi Arabia, Dharan
Crude oil supplier, location UK, London
Crude oil, Feed stocks trader, location Switzerland, Geneva
Exchange partner, location Germany, Hamburg
Cargo inspector, international
Shipping agent, international
Forwarding agent, international
Supply sales customer, location Germany, Frankfurt
Supply sales customer, location Czechia, Prague
Crude pipeline operator, location Triest (terminal) and Munich (headquarter)
Product pipeline operator, location Frankfurt

External: Own International Company (but different entities)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 5



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Other affiliate, location Netherlands, Rotterdam
Other affiliate, location Switzerland, Zurich
Global Crude Trading, location United States, Houston
Regional Product & Feed Stock Trading, location Belgium, Brussels

Internal: Own Local Company (transfer pricing)
S&D ñ Refining (crude feed stocks)
Refining ñ S&D (finished and semi-finished products)
S&D ñ Fuels Marketing (finished products)

Figure 3: S&D Interaction

6 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

SCM Logistics Example for the S&D Business
Organization
The logistics organization of primary and secondary distribution in German Oil
contains organizational units allocated in Europe. Following the supply chain of
crude oil into the refinery via a pipeline, and oil products out of the refinery via
different means of transportation, the supply & distribution department has to
monitor logistic operations as follows:
ï Multiple crude or feed stocks purchasing terminals (1)

ñ International locations operated by supplier (or vendor) or third party
ï Crude terminal (pipeline head) Triest (2)

ñ International (on coast) location
ñ Joint venture operated by third party (pipeline operator)
ñ Joint storage for all shippers, that is, by grade, not by ownership
ñ Receipt and storage of crude and feed stocks on behalf of shippers.

ï Crude pipeline Triest ñ Ingolstadt (3)
ñ Movement of crude and feed stocks from crude terminal to refinery

(across border).
ñ Joint venture operation with third-party pipeline operator

ï Refinery Ingolstadt (represented as terminal) (4)
ñ Domestic (off coast) location operated by S&D. This terminal is not

identical with the refinery distribution terminal. The distribution
terminal receives the products listed under output from the refinery.

ñ Input into the refinery: crude and feed stocks (condensate, naphtha,
distillate, vacuum gas oil, atmospheric residue)

ñ Output from the refinery: gas, semi-finished products (naphtha,
vacuum gas oil, atmospheric residue, base oil, solvents), and finished
products (LPG, gasoline, distillate, fuel oil, asphalt, coke)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 7



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Figure 4: Primary and Secondary Distribution in VOIL DE

ï Refinery distribution terminal Ingolstadt (5)
ñ Domestic location operated by S&D
ñ Truck, rail, barge, and product pipeline operations
ñ Discharge of feed stocks for the refinery and, in exceptional cases

(refinery turnarounds) receipt of finished products
ñ Loading of finished and semi-finished products
ñ Pick up of finished products with partner additive package (partner

brand) by two exchange partners
ï Distribution terminal airport Frankfurt (6.1)

ñ Domestic location operated by third party
ñ Finished products (jet fuels) supplied through product pipeline

(third-party operator) from refinery distribution terminal
ñ Own stocks in third-party consignment

ï Distribution terminal Dresden (6.2)
ñ Domestic location operated by S&D
ñ Finished products supplied by rail (third-party operator) from the

refinery distribution terminal
ñ Terminal Automation System (TAS) and automated load data

transmission
ï Distribution terminal Hamburg (7)

8 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

ñ Domestic location, joint venture, operated by third party
ñ Physical inventory for both exchange partners (no own inventory)
ñ Pick up of finished products with own additive package (own brand) by

own customers, and stock transfers of finished (non-additive) product
to terminal B

ñ Allocation of lifted volume as per exchange agreements with the two
exchange partners

ñ Terminal Automation System (TAS) and automated load data
transmission

ï Import terminal Rotterdam (8)
ñ International (on coast) location
ñ Purchasing point for feed stocks and finished products
ñ Discharge into rented tanks or board-to-board (tanker to barge)
ñ Delivered sales cross-border to domestic customers (rail, barge)
ñ Stock transfers cross-border to domestic terminals (rail, barge)

ï Distribution terminal Kˆln (9)
ñ Domestic location operated by S&D
ñ Finished products supplied by barge (own fleet, third-party fleet) from

import terminal Rotterdam
ñ TAS and automated load data transmission

Organizational Elements in the Logistics Process
Organizational elements are structures that represent the legal or organizational
views of an enterprise. You can design your company structure based on your
business processes. Defining organizational levels is an essential step in your
project and is vital for all subsequent activities.
Analyze the organizational structures and process structures in your company and
match them with SAP structures. Once you have decided on an organizational
structure, it is very difficult to change it.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 9



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Figure 5: Organizational Elements in the Logistics Process

Each client contains its own organization elements, master records, and set of
tables. SAP systems use the client concept to allow legally and financially
independent entities to coexist in a system. Clients are part of the defining
technical structure of the SAP system. From a business perspective, the client
forms a corporate group. System transactions provide special functions for
working with clients.

Note: Client names are always numeric.

10 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

The procurement process uses the following organizational elements:
ï As the smallest organizational unit in external accounting, the company

code represents an independent accounting unit. This includes entry of all
accountable transactions and the creation of all proofs for a legally required
individual account closing. Documents such as balance sheets and profit and
loss statements are created at company code level.
An examples of a company code might be a company within a corporate
group or a subsidiary.

ï The plant is an organizational element within a company.
Materials management is primarily concerned with the flow of materials.
From a materials management point of view, a plant is, above all, a location
where material stock is kept. A plant can be a manufacturing facility or a
warehouse distribution center.
In production, a plant can represent a manufacturing facility. In sales and
distribution, a plant represents the location from which materials and services
are distributed and corresponds to a distribution center. The relevant stocks
are kept here. A plant can, for example, represent a grouping of storage
locations in physical proximity. If you sell a service, a plant can represent
the location from which services are rendered (such as an office).
A plant must be uniquely assigned to a company code. The assignment
between sales organizations and plants does not have to be unique. The plant
is essential for determining the shipping point.

ï The storage location allows the differentiation of material stocks within a
plant. Inventory management on a quantity basis is carried out at storage
location level in the plant. Physical inventory is carried out at storage
location level.
Plant and storage location are organizational units that can be used by all
logistic areas.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 11



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Figure 6: Organizational Elements in Procurement and Inventory
Management

The purchasing organization is responsible for the enterpriseís purchasing
requirements. This unit is structured to negotiate the general conditions of
purchase for one or more plants or companies. Pricing conditions are set at
the purchasing organization level. You can incorporate purchasing into the
company structure by assigning the purchasing organization to company codes
and plants. This means that you can determine whether or not purchasing is
organized centrally in your company. You can distinguish between plant-specific,
cross-plant, and cross-company-code purchasing.
The purchasing group represents a buyer or a group of buyers who is responsible
for certain purchasing activities. This cannot be assigned to a purchasing
organization.
The sales organization is an organizational unit in logistics that groups the
enterprise according to the requirements of Sales and Distribution. A sales
organization is responsible for distributing goods and services. Therefore, it is also
liable for sold products and is responsible for the customers' rights of recourse.
The sales organization is also used, for example, to take a regional, national, or
international subdivision of the market into account.
A sales organization is uniquely assigned to a company code. More than one
sales organization can be assigned to a company code. If you use Sales and
Distribution, you need at least one sales organization. You maintain your own
master data for a sales organization. In the sales statistics, the sales organization

12 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

is the highest summation level. All items in a Sales and Distribution document,
that is, all items of an order, an outbound delivery, or a billing document, belong
to a sales organization.
A distribution channel is a means through which saleable materials or services
reach the customer. Several distribution channels can be assigned to a sales
organization. If you use Sales and Distribution, you need at least one distribution
channel. The distribution channel is used to:
ï Define responsibilities
ï Achieve flexible pricing
ï Differentiate sales statistics
A division is used to group materials and services.
A sales organization can have several divisions assigned to it, for which it is
responsible. If you use Sales and Distribution, you will need at least one division.
The system uses the division to determine the sales areas to which a material or
a service is assigned. A division can, for example, represent a product group.
Therefore, you could restrict price agreements with a customer to a certain
division. You can also conduct statistical analysis by division.
The sales area is a combination of the sales organization, distribution channel,
and division. It defines which distribution channel a sales organization uses
to sell products from a certain division. Each Sales and Distribution document
is assigned to exactly one sales area, and this assignment cannot be changed. A
sales area can belong to only one company code. This relationship is created by
assigning the sales organization.
During the processing of Sales and Distribution documents, the system accesses
various master data, according to the sales area. This master data includes, for
example, customer master data, material master data, prices, and discounts. In
addition, the system carries out several checks concerning the validity of certain
entries according to the sales area.

Note: A simple organizational structure can be better than a complex one.
For example, it simplifies master data updates. Do not define complex
organizational structures just to have detailed reporting options. Use fields
on the master data screen instead.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 13



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Figure 7: Organizational Elements in Sales and Distribution

The shipping/receiving point is the highest-level organizational unit that controls
your shipping activities. Each inbound or outbound delivery is processed by one
shipping point. The shipping point can be a loading ramp, a mail depot, or a
rail depot. It can also be, for example, a group of employees responsible for
organizing urgent deliveries.
You assign a shipping point at plant level. A shipping point is a physical place and
should be near the delivering plant. More than one shipping point can be assigned
to a plant. You can also assign several shipping points to a plant. This would be
appropriate for plants in physical proximity.
Shipping is an integrated module of logistics executive processing.
A loading point is a place in a shipping point where goods are loaded or
discharged.
Business partners are legal or natural persons with whom you have a business
relationship. Customers and vendors are business partners with whom you have a
relationship involving the transfer of goods and services.
Business partners have a number of different functions, described as partner
functions, in connection with your company. You use partner functions to define
the rights and responsibilities of each partner type in a business transaction.
Different business partners may carry out one or more partner functions. For
this reason, you can assign individual business partners to a number of partner
functions. Data on business partners is managed in master records. Data on partner
functions is stored in these master records and used in financials and logistics.

14 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

A business partner can be a customer and a vendor at the same time if, for
example, your customer also supplies goods to you, or if a vendor is also one of
your customers. In this case, you must create a customer master record and a
vendor master record for the business partner. You can create a link between the
two master records by entering the vendor number in the customer master record
and the customer number in the vendor master record.
The vendor master record contains information about a vendor from a purchasing
and accounting perspective. Data in the vendor master record is structured into
three categories:
ï General data: This includes the vendor communication data, address and

bank details, for example. This data is valid for the entire corporate group
(client).

ï Company code (accounting) data: This comprises data such as the number
of the reconciliation account and the payment methods for automatic
payment transactions. This is maintained at company code level.

ï Purchasing data: Data on the vendor is managed separately for each
purchasing organization, for example, payment conditions. This includes the
purchase order currency, Incoterms, and the vendor's tax data.

General data, for example, address data, is also relevant to purchasing. There
are other levels for purchasing data that are optional, such as plant and vendor
sub-range.
In accounting, the vendor is regarded as the companyís crediting business partner.
The vendor master record is therefore maintained by accounting and purchasing.
You can use the authorization concept to define how data maintenance should be
organized in the vendor master record. Each department can maintain general
data, as well as purchasing and accounting-specific data, centrally or decentrally.
Often, purchasing also maintains data at corporate group level.
You can block a vendor master record, for example, if the quality of the vendor's
products is poor. You can block a vendor for an individual material via the source
list.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 15



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Figure 8: Business Partners

The customer master groups data into categories such as general data, sales area
data, and company code data.
The customer master includes all data necessary for processing orders, deliveries,
invoices, and customer payments.
General data is relevant for Sales and Distribution and for accounting. It is
stored centrally (client-specific) to avoid data redundancy. It is valid for all
organizational units within a client.
Company code (accounting) data is relevant for accounting. It is valid for the
respective company code.
Sales area data is relevant for Sales and Distribution. It is valid for the respective
sales area (sales organization, distribution channel, and division).
Examples of other business partners in the SAP ERP system are:
Contact persons are people in a business partner company with whom you are
in contact by telephone, mail, or in person to perform business transactions. You
store detailed information on contact persons in business partner master records.
Because the contact person is part of the business partner company, you enter
contact person data in the respective customer or vendor master record. You do
not need a separate master record for contact persons. You assign a new number to
each contact person in a master record. You can enter as many contact persons as
desired for each business partner. The data for the contact person can be used in
the associated functions in logistics and financials.

16 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

During their day-to-day activities, your sales personnel in the field and in the
office have the opportunity to gather information about competitors. You can
record this competitor data in the system as master data. In sales support, you can
maintain master records for each of your competitors. You can store information
about competitive products in a special kind of material master. You maintain
master records for competitors in the same way as you maintain customer master
records. You can store the competitor's address, information about the marketing
profile, and key people in the competitor master record. By using texts (which you
can tailor to your own requirements), you can also record extensive information
about each competitor's activities.
The material master record is the main source of material-specific data in an
enterprise. It is used by all logistics modules. The integration of all material
data in a single database object prevents the problem of data redundancy. Every
area, such as purchasing, inventory management, materials planning, and invoice
verification can use the stored data.
Since materials are processed by various user departments within a company, and
each department stores different information for the materials, the material master
is grouped by user departments (functions). Each user department has a different
view of the material master record and is responsible for maintaining the data
to support its function, for example:
ï Basic data relevant for all areas: Valid for all organizational units within

a client
ï Purchasing data for ordering
ï Sales organization data relevant for Sales and Distribution: Valid for the

respective sales organization and the distribution channel
ï Plant data relevant for Sales and Distribution: Valid for the respective

delivering plant
ï Inventory management data for posting goods movements and managing

physical inventory
ï Accounting data for material valuation upon goods movements or in invoice

verification
ï Materials planning data for material requirements planning (MRP)
There is additional data for several other areas, which is valid for various
organizational units. The data maintained within a view may be valid for more
than one organizational level.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 17



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Figure 9: Material Master

The end-to-end business scenario that will be executed within this training course
covers the functions of several logistic components in SAP ERP. To introduce
operations in a local oil company (German Oil) and interaction with divisions of
an international oil company, corresponding organizational elements were defined
in the system.
Organizational elements in Materials Management, Financial Accounting, and
Sales and Distribution are integrated with master data, in compliance with business
process requirements, and are used as the basis to create follow-up document
flow (transactional data) within planning, scheduling, execution, and analysis
of logistics operations in primary and secondary distribution. The definition of
system components and corresponding organizational elements that are required
for implementation of business scenarios is an essential step in your project and is
vital for all subsequent activities.

Hint: The SAP Customizing Implementation Guide (IMG) provides a
comprehensive interface to define an enterprise structure in the system.
This consists of two steps: definition of organizational units and control
settings, and assignment of organizational units.

18 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

Figure 10: Enterprise Structures in SAP for Oil&GAS

As an example of organizational modeling, organizational elements (units) and
master data are shown in the following figures. Each graph contains a party or
business object in the real world and the corresponding organizational element or
master data type that will be used in business processes of described in this course

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 19



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Figure 11: Entity-Relationship model

Figure 12: Enterprise Structures - Supply Business Scenario

20 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

Figure 13: Business Scenario - Triest DES

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 21



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

22 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

Exercise 1: Enterprise Structures in SAP
for Oil&GAS
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Describe the organization elements of an international oil company
ï Display the organization elements and control settings in the SAP for

Oil&Gas system

Business Example
You have joined the project team that is implementing the SAP for Oil&Gas
solution at an international oil company. As the employee responsible for
organizational modeling, you need to familiarize yourself with the structure that
has already been created and verify the settings. You then want to display the
existing enterprise structure.

Task:
The project team has already modeled your companyís organizational structure in
the SAP system. Familiarize yourself with the organizational units that have been
set up to model your companyís organizational structure.
1. What is the description of company codes 1000 and 1100? Which currency

key assigned for amounts in the system for company codes1000 and 1100.
What is the address of company code 1100?
Complete the following table as appropriate.

Company Code Company Currency Key Country Key
Name

1000
1100

Note down the address of company code 1100.
2. Find detailed data about plants 1001 and 1107 and complete the following

table as appropriate.

Plant Name2 Language Key Country Key
1001
1107

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 23



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

What does Language Key control?
What is the address of plant 1107?

3. Find references between the company code and plant that have already been
defined in the system. Complete the table as appropriate

Company Code/Country Plant/Country
1001 (US)
1107 (IT)

24 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

Solution 1: Enterprise Structures in SAP
for Oil&GAS
Task:
The project team has already modeled your companyís organizational structure in
the SAP system. Familiarize yourself with the organizational units that have been
set up to model your companyís organizational structure.
1. What is the description of company codes 1000 and 1100? Which currency

key assigned for amounts in the system for company codes1000 and 1100.
What is the address of company code 1100?
Complete the following table as appropriate.

Company Code Company Currency Key Country Key
Name

1000
1100

Note down the address of company code 1100.
a) Go to the SAP Reference IMG and navigate to the definition of

organizational units: Tools→ Customizing→ IMG→ Execute Project.
b) Choose SAP reference IMG→ Enterprise Structure→ Definition -

Financial Accounting - Edit, Copy, Delete, Check Company Code -
Edit Company Code Data.

c) Select the required company code from the list.
d) Choose Details to get the company code details.
e) Fill in the following table.

Company Company Currency Key Country Key
Code Name
1000 VOIL Int USD US
1100 VOIL DE EUR DE

f) ) Find the address of company code 1100 by choosing Address.
g) Note down the address of company code 1100.

2. Find detailed data about plants 1001 and 1107 and complete the following
table as appropriate.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 25



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Plant Name2 Language Key Country Key
1001
1107

What does Language Key control?
What is the address of plant 1107?
a) Go to the SAP Reference IMG and navigate to definition of

organizational units: Tools→ Customizing→ IMG→ Execute Project.
b) Choose SAP reference IMG→ Enterprise Structure→ Definition→

Logistics→ General→ Define, copy, delete, check plant→ Define
Plant.

c) Select the required plant code from the list
d) Choose Details to get the plant details.
e) Complete the following table.

Plant Name2 Language Key Country Key
1001 Transit EN US

International
1107 Purchase Triest EN IT

f) Using F1 help, find information on the Language Key field.
The language key designates the language in which you display texts,
enter texts, and print documents.

g) Find the address of plant 1107 by choosing Address.
Address of plant 1107:

3. Find references between the company code and plant that have already been
defined in the system. Complete the table as appropriate

Continued on next page

26 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Enterprise structures and Logistics

Company Code/Country Plant/Country
1001 (US)
1107 (IT)

a) In the IMG activity Assign plant to company code, you assign each
plant to a company code. A plant can only belong to one company
code. Complete functionality of the system can only be ensured if the
plants assigned to a company code are only those situated in the same
country as the company code. It is therefore recommended that you also
create a company code for each country in which a plant is situated.
Choose IMG→ Enterprise Structure→ Assignment→ Logistics→
General→ Assign plant to company code.

b) Complete the following table.

Company Code/Country Plant/Country
1000 (US) 1001 (US)
1100 (DE) 1107 (IT)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 27



Unit 1: Oil Company Structure and Logistics IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain the structure and organizational levels within an international oil

company
ï Explain the logistics and supply chain in a local oil company
ï Name the organizational elements in the logistics process
ï Define the enterprise structures in SAP for Oil&Gas

Related Information
More information on the possible settings for master data and organizational
elements from the SCM view point is provided in documentation for SAP ERP,
which is available at http://help.sap.com.

28 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Unit Summary

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain the structure and organizational levels within an international oil

company
ï Explain the logistics and supply chain in a local oil company
ï Name the organizational elements in the logistics process
ï Define the enterprise structures in SAP for Oil&Gas

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 29



Unit Summary IOG100

30 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 2
Physical Oil and Gas Commodity

Trading

Unit Overview
In the trading environment, it is necessary to control and organize the flow of
materials and services from vendors to customers. The principle of the business
is to match demand from the customer with supply from the vendor. This type
of business is known as back-to-back business. The industry defines this type of
business as business where purchasing and sales are carried out in parallel, in the
same international / regional trading department. The unit illustrates Trading &
Operations Business Landscape which is available with SAP for Oil&Gas.

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï List the typical business process in the global trade of oil commodities
ï Describe the major functions in trade management with GTM
ï Recognize the document flow to be generated under trade contracts
ï Operate logistics transactions in GTM with SAP for Oil&Gas

Unit Contents
Lesson: Global Trade Management ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

Exercise 2: Global Trade Management... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 31



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Lesson: Global Trade Management
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain some typical business process of physical oil and gas
commodity trading and will identify Trading & Operations Business Landscape,
which is available with SAP for Oil&Gas. The lesson focuses on Global Trade
Management (GTM) and illustrates the document flow to be generated under a
trade contract. You will learn major functions in trade management with GTM,
such as trading contracts, trading expenses, the Trading Execution Workbench,
and position management.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï List the typical business process in the global trade of oil commodities
ï Describe the major functions in trade management with GTM
ï Recognize the document flow to be generated under trade contracts
ï Operate logistics transactions in GTM with SAP for Oil&Gas

Business Example
International Trade VOIL INT (company code 1000) arrange a quarterly volume
for certain type of crude oil to be purchased from supplier Saudi Arabian Oil
(vendor 400003) to fulfill the requirements of VOIL DE (customer 300000).
International Trade processes the deal with crude oil. It only takes ìflash titleî
of ownership, meaning that the commodity is sold immediately after purchase.
Both deals are concluded on a Free On Board (FOB) basis in a port of origin
(Sidi Kerir in the Mediterranean Sea).
There are logistics and financials transactions to be performed to execute this
back-to-back deal, such as goods receipt, goods issue, invoice verification, and
customer billing.

Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading
Physical oil and gas commodity trading is usually considered in the context of
international trade, which is the economic interaction among different nations
involving the exchange of goods and services, that is, exports and imports. The
guiding principle of international trade is comparative advantage, which indicates
that every country, no matter their level of development, can find something that it
can produce cheaper than another country.

32 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

In the trading environment, it is necessary to control and organize the flow of
materials and services from vendors to customers. The principle of the business
is to match demand from the customer with supply from the vendor. This type
of business is known as triangular business, principal business, or back-to-back
business.
The industry defines this type of business as business where purchasing and sales
are carried out in parallel, in the same international or regional trading department.
The stages of commodity trading and relative SAP software components are
represented in the following figure.

Figure 14: Trading & Operations Business Landscape

1. Market Tracking & Analysis: Front Office Real-Time Links
Market Prices
News (for example, Reuters)
Crude Output
Refinery Outturns
Correlations
Trends and so on

2. Deal Capture: Front Office Role-Driven Portal
Physical Deal Capture
Paper Deal Capture

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 33



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Deal Assignments
3. Trading Decision Support & Optimization: Front Office Trading Support

Trade Evaluation & Optimization
4. Physical Trade Management: Mid-Office Physical Trade Management
5.

a) Paper Trade and Risk Management: Mid-Office Paper Management
Paper Trade ìOpsî
Paper Instrument Management (Futures, Swaps, Options, and so on)
Hedging
Value at Risk
Paper Positions

b) Complex Risk Management and Modeling: Mid-Office Simulation
Scenarios
Positions What-Ifs
Risk Optimization
Analysis

6. Logistics Operations Management: Mid-Office Operations
Demand Forecasting
Inventory Management
Nomination
Scheduling
Vessel Chartering
Ops Management

7. Financial Execution and Management: Back Office Execution Mgmt
Security & Controls
Authorization Concept
Credit Check
Invoicing & Settlement, Accounting
Payments
Documentation
Financials

34 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

8. Enterprise Reporting and Analysis: SAP Reporting
Review & Analyze Profit and Loss
Complete Position Reporting
Audit Reporting
Market Performance
Custom Reporting

Business Scenario: Supply Wet Barrels
It is common practice to negotiate term purchase contracts with major suppliers
of crude, such as Aramco, Saudi Arabia or Statoil, Norway. These deals are
usually concluded by global or regional headquarter trading organizations, that
is, different entities within the company. There may be also term contracts with
upstream entities. This organizational structure is driven by company needs and
may be different for major oil companies. Because of this, the purchase process of
crude becomes a transaction chain of supplier to international trading to receiving
affiliate. This transaction is also called a trade or back-to-back deal.
The pricing is nearly 100% based upon a pricing formula, using officially
published quotes on commodity exchange to reflect real market conditions.
Quotes are published for standard products by location (market) and for some
crudes (marker crudes) and feed stocks. Crude without published quotes is linked
to marker crudes plus differentials for quality and location differences. The
formula structures are, in general, highly complex.
Contracts are concluded for a specified period (usually a year). They may be
also concluded as ìevergreenî contracts with renegotiation dates (usually every
year). There may be also term contracts with third-party trading companies for
crude (exceptions) and feed stocks (more common). Spot purchase contracts are
concluded for various reasons with all potential suppliers (major crude and feed
stock suppliers, competitors, other trader, and so on). These are one time deals,
usually with one delivery only, to cover unplanned requirements. The pricing is
mostly formula or quotes-based as well, but may be also agreed at a fixed price.
International / regional trading is responsible for vendor management with
international or upstream crude suppliers. The local affiliate concludes a standard
purchasing agreement with the company trading entities. The terms are variable,
but usually the trading company sells at acquisition price plus a fee for the service
provided.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 35



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Figure 15: Business Scenario - Supply Wet Barrels

Figure 16: Business Scenario - Supply Contracts

International / regional trading is responsible for proper handling of risks related
to changes in market prices for crude oil and currency exchange rates. Hedging
provides a way to protect company profit and control or limit risks. There are

36 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

a number of hedging scenarios. A typical example for a ìshort hedgeî is the
purchase (by a trader) of foreign crude (long haul from Arabian Gulf), to be
delivered to the United States Gulf Coast and sold at prevailing spot prices.
The trader fears that prices will fall before delivery can be made. To protect his
purchase (wet barrels), the trader sells futures contracts (paper barrels) to fix his
sales price, thereby fixing his resale margin.
Hedging transactions must be linked to the related purchase or sale of wet barrels
to determine the net profit or loss for the whole scenario of securing a wet trade by
the futures market. The transactions are standardized per exchange (NYMEX, IPE
London). Contracts or lots represent a specific volume, for example, 1 NYMEX
contract: 1,000 barrels.
A hedging scenario for currency is applied when the contract currency is different
from domestic one of international / regional trading. Thus a certain amount
of currency has to be purchased or reserved by the due time of payment under
the contract to avoid risks related to failing or rising domestic/contract currency
exchange rates. International / regional trading purchase currency option to
acquire certain amount of currency at fix price on the future date.
Futures transactions in commodity/currency hedging do not represent physical
movements, that is, there is only financial accounting. Proper hedge accounting is
essential so that futures losses can be properly balanced with cash market gains,
and cash market losses with futures gains.

Global Trade Management
In the SAP system, this type of business process, in which sales and purchasing
processes are carried out simultaneously, is defined as a trading business. A
trading contract is used to handle this ordering process. Subsequent transactions,
such as goods receipt, inventory management, goods issue, invoice verification,
and customer billing are maintained in the standard Sales and Distribution (SD)
and materials management (MM) components.
The trading contract enables you to implement various different business
transactions to integrate sales and purchasing documents. For example, you
receive a sales order from a customer, search for the best vendor to fulfill the
customer's requirements, and issue a purchase order, all in one transaction. You
coordinate shipping, transportation, and customs clearance for the goods. The
vendor then delivers the goods directly to the customer. The trading company
receives an invoice from the vendor, and bills the customer. Finally, you receive
payment from the customer and make a payment to the vendor.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 37



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Figure 17: Global Trade Management

Trading contracts are documents in the SAP System that integrate multiple legal
contracts between customers and vendors. With the trading contract, both sales
and purchase contracts or orders can be maintained using a single transaction.
In a trading company, one person or department usually carries out both buying
and selling procedures. The simultaneous sales and purchasing data entry screen
is necessary to avoid redundant data entries and reduce missed operations.
With one trading contract document, the system creates follow-on sales-side
documents and purchase-side documents after releasing. In the contract document
header, you can maintain sales-side data that is copied to each item line. Then you
maintain purchasing data in each item line. You can create multiple purchase
orders to fulfill one sales order if necessary. The trading contract can be used as
one-sided contract, such as a purchase-only contract or a sales-only contract.
Using position management, you can manage the material position and subsequent
process of a one-side contract item.
The trading contract component is a center of trading business. It incorporates
sales orders, purchase orders, and vendor billing documents for trading expenses.
Users can monitor the processing status of all subsequent transactions associated
with the trading contract via extended document flow.
The trading contract also provides accurate profit simulation report, including all
the costs and revenue elements.
After the deals are completed and all the data is transferred to accounting, you can
use the trading contract number to check the actual profit.

38 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Supply with Title Transfer
The trading contract is an order-processing document that integrates sales and
purchasing information in one transaction. It is used as a basic document for the
entire trading process. Trading execution, the follow-on process of the trading
transaction, and expense handling are based on the trading contract.
In the trading contract, you enter both sales and purchasing information: customer,
vendor, material, sales and purchase unit, sales and purchase price, and so on. In
addition, you can also enter planned expenses relative to the trading contract.

Figure 18: Document Flow - Supply with Title Transfer

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 39



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Figure 19: Document Flow - Supply with Title Transfer without MM

In the scenario, you create a pre-trading contract to maintain a trade agreement
that contains long-term sales and purchase arrangements. You also can use a
trading contract to maintain just one part of an arrangement, either sales orders or
purchase orders, depending on your requirements. During processing, you create
sales and purchase-side trading contracts with reference to an existing pre-trading
contract. This is useful in cases where you want to create a contract referencing a
previous contract for the same customer or referencing a pre-contract at item level.
If the document status is set to approved, subsequent documents, such as a sales
order and a purchase order, can be automatically generated in the background
while the system creates a trading contract.
Subsequent trading transactions such as goods receipt, inventory management,
goods issue, invoice verification, and customer billing are initiated via the Trading
Execution Workbench and are maintained in Sales and Distribution (SD) and
materials management (MM). The follow-on process of expense handling is based
on the trading contract and is initiated via the TWE as well.

The Trading Execution Workbench
In global trade, you often need to process several different kinds of transactions at
the same time. The TEW is used to process all follow-on documents related to a
trading contract. It provides a central cockpit where traders can process trading
contracts and their subcomponents, such as purchase orders, sales orders, and

40 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

follow-on documents. In addition, the TEW automates a large part of the data
entry, making processing quicker, easier, and more error-free. You can call the
position management and trading expense functions directly from the TEW.

Figure 20: Trading Execution Workbench

the role-based layout of the TEW is Customizable to support different lines
of business (for example, crude oil or feedstock). Smart functions anticipate
which tasks you want to perform and suggest the appropriate source and target
documents automatically. The system remembers your selection settings from
one session to the next.
You can process multiple documents on one screen (including creating deliveries,
shipping notifications for customs clearance, posting goods issue, and so on). A
document flow diagram helps you keep track of what follow-on documents you
have already processed and what remains to be done. A message area on the
screen displays all errors, warnings, and information messages that you receive
during the current session.
Constraints
If you process a document in the TEW, you cannot use standard SD/MM
transactions to make changes to it, as this could lead to data inconsistency.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 41



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

To process documents on the initial Trading Execution Workbench screen, choose
the TEW mode that represents your line of business. You have to define the
following selection criteria:
ï Group: This represents a group of steps, or tasks, involved in processing

a given kind of trading (for example, tasks involved in export, domestic,
back-to-back trading, and so on).

ï Step: This indicates the target document you want to create (for example,
delivery document).

ï Mode: This indicates the action you want to perform (for example, create,
change, copy with reference).

ï Prestep: This indicates the document you want to use as your data source
(for example, sales order).

Trading Contract: Price Determination
In trading contracts, you use price determination to maintain both purchase and
sales prices efficiently. You can enter the purchase and sales price per unit directly
in the item if the price per unit is already known when you create the trading
contract. If the sales price is not known, it is possible to simulate the sales price
using the purchase price. Retail pricing can be used to calculate sales prices using
the determining purchase price and a markup.
Purchase and sales price determination sequences for retail and standard pricing
are defined in the Customizing settings. You can therefore use your own
calculation schema if those specified in the SAP standard system do not meet
your business requirements.
With SAP for Oil&Gas there is another option available. Formula and average
pricing (F&A pricing) uses external quotations such as Platts, Reuters, The
Oil Market Report, and The European Oil Telegram to determine the price of a
material. It can be used both on the purchasing side and on the sales side.
The purpose of formula and average pricing is to enable the calculation of product
prices with the help of external quotations over a set period of time. The price can
be further modified with company-defined calculation rules before it is used. The
system also takes into account currency fluctuations within the time period.
Price quotation data can be entered manually or it can be entered via a remote
connection to a data provider using the data feed function of the external quotation
interface. The external quotation interface automatically makes real-time market
data available for F&A pricing. The interface accesses and accepts published
prices, rates, and commodities from providers of financial information, such as
Reuters, Platts, or Telerate.

42 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Figure 21: Trading Contract Price Determination (1)

Figure 22: Trading Contract Price Determination (2)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 43



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

The options for price determination in a trading contract are:
ï Direct purchase and sales price entry
ï Price determination using the SAP standard calculation schema (standard

pricing)
ï Price simulation using trade pricing (retail pricing)
ï Price determination using SAP for Oil&Gas formula pricing (F&A pricing)

Trading Expenses
Trading charges linked to the trading contract can be processed using the trading
expense function. The trading expense function enables you to handle various
costs and commissions incurred by a trading business. There are various types of
expenses in the trading environment, all of which are realized at different times
and posted to different accounts, and these are often not synchronized with the
main flow of a trading contract.
Trading companies must efficiently control trading-related expenses, such as
inland/ocean freight, loading charges, storage costs, insurance, customs duty and
commission. It is important to accurately assess costs, including purchasing costs
and all trading charges associated with the trading contract.

Figure 23: Expense Overview - Types of Expense

The trading expense function is fully integrated with the trading contract so that
you can centrally maintain purchase related expenses and selling related expenses.

44 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Planned expenses can be entered in the trading contract and accrued. You
can maintain an estimated expense value in a trading contract. This value is
included in the contract price calculation as the system automatically transfers the
planned value to the contract pricing schema. You can then see the entire planned
profitability of a contract.
You can maintain the planned expenses until the contract is completed.
Unplanned expenses can be linked to the trading contract at a later stage when
you receive invoices from service providers, freight forwarders, insurance
companies, and customs offices. It is thus possible to assess accurate profitability
as costs and revenue elements are linked to the trading contract. During trading
contract processing, you can post expenses without referencing any planned data.
The vendor billing document is used to process unplanned expenses. After the
trading contract is released, unplanned expenses can be created. Both sales and
purchasing expenses can be posted.

Figure 24: Expense Posting Process

The above figure depicts the relationship between the trading contract process and
the trading expense process.
The new process flow gives you more flexibility in maintaining expense data. In
trading contract processing, you can maintain planned expenses, which are treated
as pricing conditions in the contract pricing schema. You can reference them when
you post expenses in other processes.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 45



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

When logistics documents are processed, you can post expenses to a specific
account. The vendor billing document is used to post expenses. It has an
additional function that enables you to post expenses to both accounts payable
and accounts receivable.

Position Management
Position management reduces inventory risk and selling loss. Position
management has two main functions. The first is to control the values entered
during contract creation. The second is to create links between sales and
purchasing data at the item level. Supporting this, two main functions have been
created: portfolio management and association management

Figure 25: Risks from Independent Supply and Demand Chains

Portfolio Management.
A special key is dynamically assigned to the contract item. This is used to
optimize the sales and purchasing balance. If position management is active in
your system, one portfolio master record is assigned to each trading contract item.

46 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Portfolio management contains a function that monitors the item position. In
Global Trade Management, a portfolio is defined as a predefined selection group
that makes finer item classification possible. The main purposes of portfolio
management are to:
ï Classify the trading contract items
ï Report similar product lines
ï Control important materials, countries, customers, or vendors in view of

risk consideration
Portfolio determination is executed when trading contract items and quantities
are fixed. The system determines which portfolio to assign when you confirm
the material, its quantity, and its and value in an item line. The system searches
for the appropriate portfolio master record using the condition technique. The
portfolio is assigned automatically when maintaining a trading contract; however,
the assigned portfolio can be changed manually when alternative portfolio records
exist. If multiple records are selected, the system processes according to the
determination rules (manual/automatic determination). The assignment method
depends on the Customizing settings. You can also customize the timing of the
portfolio assignment

Business Benefits of Position Management
Association Management.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 47



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

When you want to associate a sales item with a purchasing item, the system
searches for the target item using the item portfolio master record as the key.
The system tracks item position information The main purposes of association
management are to:
1. Create and maintain a document item link

The system searches for the appropriate association partner list, based on the
assigned portfolio. You can create new associations between items with the
same portfolio.
Association maintenance is possible in both the trading contract and the
logistics document. In the trading contract, you can call association functions
either manually or automatically. In the logistics document, you cannot see
the association directly using the document. It is maintained separately using
the Trading Execution Workbench, or by creating the logistics document.

2. Update open quantity information
Once a portfolio is assigned to a contract item, the system checks the item
position and authorizes processing of the item with the associated quantity.
You can refer to the open quantity and value status report in the contract.

3. Update the contract item position
Depending on document transition, the contract item position also changes.
It is automatically updated when you process the document using the Trading
Execution Workbench. You can refer to the association status report to see
how far the contract has been processed and which association partner it has.

48 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Figure 26: Business Benefits of Position Management

During trading contract processing, the association function can be started during
the following processes:
1. Creating a trading contract
2. Creating a new logistics document (only in the sales processes)
3. Changing an item quantity during logistics document processing (only in the

purchasing process)
4. Maintaining the association independently using the Trading Execution

Workbench
Associations can be maintained soon after a portfolio is assigned to a contract
item. You can customize when the association maintenance function is called. It
can be called automatically or manually. Association maintenance is possible only
if there is an open item quantity in the contract.
The association can be maintained during sales document processing using
the TEW. This function is called at the point of follow-on sales document
maintenance. The system requires you to check association data before proceeding
to the document maintenance screen. You must complete the association step
before you proceed.
The selected document must be in Released status. Only a contract with follow-on
logistics document processing can be selected as a source document. A portfolio
record must have been assigned during contract creation.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 49



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

You can maintain the association of the existing document using the Trading
Execution Workbench. You can see and maintain the association relationship
independently of any logistics process. The item position is updated automatically
as association maintenance takes place.

SAP GTM Scenario: Supply Wet Barrels
The trading contract enables you to implement various business transactions for
integrating sales documents and purchase documents.
As an example scenario, International Trade VOIL INT (company code 1000)
arranges a quarterly plan volume for certain crude oil type to be purchased from
supplier Saudi Arabian Oil (vendor 400003) to fulfill the requirements of VOIL
DE (customer 300000). The simultaneous entry of sales and purchasing data is
necessary to avoid redundant data entries and reduce missed operations.
Actual operations under this pre-trade contract are positioned as back-to-back
deals on an FOB basis in a port of origin (Sidi Kerir in the Mediterranean Sea)
and posted in the system with purchase and sales trading contracts. Approval
of a contract initiates creation-relevant MM and SD orders to manage logistics
operations.

Figure 27: SAP GTM Stock Scenario for Supplying Wet Barrels

Subsequent transactions such as goods receipt, inventory management, goods
issue, invoice verification, and customer billing are maintained in SD and MM via
the Trading Execution Workbench. Logistics operations with flash title transfer

50 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

through International Trade VOIL INT is posted with goods receipt and goods
issue. Financial execution and management is performed with invoice verification
and customer billing.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 51



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

52 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Exercise 2: Global Trade Management
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Create a trading contract to book a back-to-back deal in the system
ï Execute a business process in the TEW for the purchasing side of the contract
ï Execute a business process in the TEW for the sales side of the contract
ï Display the complete document flow created under the trade contract

Business Example
International Trade VOil INT (company code 1000) arranges a quarterly planed
volume for certain crude oil type to be purchased from supplier Saudi Arabian
Oil (vendor 4900##) to fulfill the requirements of VOil DE (customer 3900##).
The trading contract nables you to implement different business transactions to
integrate sales and purchase documents. The simultaneous entry of sales and
purchasing data is necessary to avoid redundant data entries and reduce missed
operations.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 53



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Task:
Actual operations under this trade contract are positioned as back-to-back deals on
an FOB basis in a port of origin/export (Sidi Kerir in the Mediterranean Sea) and
an approval of the contract initiates the creation-relevant MM and SD orders to
manage logistics operations. Logistics operations with flash title transfer through
International Trade VOil INT post with goods receipt and goods issue. Financial
execution and management is performed with invoice verification and customer
billing. Subsequent transactions such as goods receipt, inventory management,
goods issue, invoice verification, and customer billing are maintained in the
standard SD/MM components via the trading execution workbench.

Figure 28: Business Process

1. Create a trading contract for company code 1000 to post the trading deal
with Saudi Arabian Oil (vendor 4900##) and VOil DE (customer 3900##)
for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## in purchase and sales quantity of
500.000 BB6 (80.000 M15). You work in a department assigned to purchase
organization 1001/010 and sales area 1000/10/10. As the flash title transfer
for material ownership has to be posted with goods receipt/issue, you use
plant 1001/TRAN.
Notice the material item pricing, partner functions, and document status
before the document is saved. Save the document and note the system
number.

Continued on next page

54 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

2. Process the trading contract created at the previous step. Check the document
status, release the trading contract, and generate follow-on documents for
the purchase and sales sides. Note the document numbers. Check the data
relevant for business logic in follow-on documents and continue forming the
document flow accordingly.

3. The vendor delivers the material item ARAB_HEAVY-## on an FOB
basis under the purchase order (created at previous step #2.o). Process this
logistics operation in the Trading Execution Workbench and create a material
document to post the data in the system.

4. The vendor delivers the invoice for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## with
pricing on an FOB basis under the purchase order and material document
(created at a previous step # 3.m). Process this logistics operation in the
Trading Execution Workbench and create a vendor Invoice to post the data in
the system.

5. The ownership title for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## has to transferred
to VOil DE (customer 3900##) under the sales order created at a previous
step # 3.m. Process this logistics operation in the Trading Execution
Workbench and create an outbound delivery to post the data in the system.

6. The ownership title for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## has to be
transferred to VOil DE (customer 3900## ) under the sales order created at a
previous step #3.m. Process this logistics operation in the Trading Execution
Workbench and create a billing document to post the data in the system.

7. The trading contract has been executed. You need to run the report and look
through the completed document flow that was generated under the contract.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 55



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Solution 2: Global Trade Management
Task:
Actual operations under this trade contract are positioned as back-to-back deals on
an FOB basis in a port of origin/export (Sidi Kerir in the Mediterranean Sea) and
an approval of the contract initiates the creation-relevant MM and SD orders to
manage logistics operations. Logistics operations with flash title transfer through
International Trade VOil INT post with goods receipt and goods issue. Financial
execution and management is performed with invoice verification and customer
billing. Subsequent transactions such as goods receipt, inventory management,
goods issue, invoice verification, and customer billing are maintained in the
standard SD/MM components via the trading execution workbench.

Figure 29: Business Process

1. Create a trading contract for company code 1000 to post the trading deal
with Saudi Arabian Oil (vendor 4900##) and VOil DE (customer 3900##)
for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## in purchase and sales quantity of
500.000 BB6 (80.000 M15). You work in a department assigned to purchase
organization 1001/010 and sales area 1000/10/10. As the flash title transfer
for material ownership has to be posted with goods receipt/issue, you use
plant 1001/TRAN.

Continued on next page

56 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Notice the material item pricing, partner functions, and document status
before the document is saved. Save the document and note the system
number.
a) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Create to reach

transaction WB21.
b) Create a trading contract. Enter the following data on the screens

Field Name Value
Contract Type Z001 Trading Contract

(Two-Sided) Stock
Shpmt

c) Press SHIFT + F8 to set up organizational data.
d) Input the following values in the Organizational Data dialog box.

Field Name Value
TEW Type 0001 Standard
Organizational Data
Sales Org. 1000 Sales Dept. VOil

In
Distr. Channel 10 Distr. Chann.

Supply

Division 10 Crude
Sales Office
Sales Group
Purchasing Org. 1001 Supply Interna-

tional
Purch. Group 010 Crude
Default items
Plant 1001
Stor. Location TRAN

e) Press F5 to copy the data into the newly created trading contract.
f) Choose Goto→ Header→ Administratiev Data and look at the

organizational data for sales and purchasing.
g) Enter the following in the header data on the screen.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 57



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Field Name Value
Sold-to party 3900## – VOil Germany
Vendor 4900## – Saudi Arabian

Oil
External Number IOG100-##

h) Press Enter.
i) Choose Goto→ Header→ Basic Data and enter the following on

the Basic Data tab.

Field Name Value
Sales ñ PO Number XQ_200X_SD##
Purchasing ñYour Reference XQ_200X_MM##

j) Choose Goto→ Header→ Ordering Party and enter the following in
the Quotation Data section.

Field Name Value
Valid from first date of the

month
Valid to last date of the month

k) Choose Goto→ Header→ Partner Data.
Notice the function of the business partners

Field Name Value
Partn.Funct Partner Name
AG Sold-to party 3900XX VOil Germany
LF Vendor 4900XX Saudi Arabian Oil
RE Bill-to party 3900XX VOil Germany
RG Payer 3900XX VOil Germany
RS Invoicing Party 4900XX Saudi Arabian Oil
WE Ship-to party 3900XX VOil Germany

l) Choose Goto→ Header→ Status.

Continued on next page

58 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Notice the traffic lights indicators for completeness check and current
application status.

Field Name Value
Completeness check Red light
Status set Blank field

m) Choose Goto→ Overview→ Overview and enter the following on the
Item Overview tab.

Field Name Value
Material ARAB_HEAVY-##

n) Press Enter.
o) Choose Goto→ Overview → Quantity Overview and enter the

following on the tab.

Field Name Value
Order quantity 500.000
Sales Unit BB6
PO quantity 500.000
Order Unit BB6

p) Press Enter.
q) Choose Goto→ Overview→ Price Overview and notice the pricing

conditions.

Field Name Value
Condition Type PB00 Gross Price
Condition Type PR00 Price

r) Choose Goto→ Overview→ Flexible Overview and notice that you
can customize the layout at your own needs.

s) Select the item for material ARAB_HEAVY-## and choose Goto→
Items→ Overview.
Notice the payment terms and Incoterms for the purchase and sales sides

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 59



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Field Name Value
PmntTerSls 0002 Within 14 days 2 % cash
IncotSales FOB Port of Origin/Export
PmntTermPu 0002 Within 14 days 2 % cash
IncotPurch FOB Port of Origin/Export

t) Choose Goto→ Items→ Sales and notice the information about
shipping and terms of delivery and payment.
Choose the Conditions (Sales) tab at item detail level.

Field Name Value
Condition Type PR00
Name Price
Rate (condition amount or 70,00
percentage)
Rate unit (currency, sales unit, or USD
%)
Condition pricing unit Per 1
Condition unit in the document BB6

u) Select condition line PR00 - PRICE and press F2 to go to the condition
details screen.

v) On the Item-Condition-Detail screen, notice the control values and
control data as following:

Field Name Value
Control Data
Condition class B Prices
Calculation type C Quantity
Condition control A Adjust for quantity variance

w) Press F3 to get back to the Item details overview screen.
x) Choose Goto→ Items→ Purchasing and notice the information about

delivery and terms of delivery and payment.
y) Choose theConditions (Purchasing) tab at item details level and notice

the following.

Continued on next page

60 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Field Name Value
Condition Type PB00
Name Gross Price
Rate (condition amount or 50,00
percentage)
Rate unit (currency, sales unit, or USD
%)
Condition pricing unit Per 1
Condition unit in the document BB6

z) Select condition line PB00 - PRICE and press F2 to get to condition
details screen.

aa) On the Item-Condition-Detail screen, notice the control values and
control data as following.

Field Name Value
Control Data
Condition class B Prices
Calculation type C Quantity
Condition control A Adjust for quantity variance

ab) Press F3 to get back to Item details overview.
ac) Choose Goto→ Items→ Partner.

Notice the functions of business partners

Field Name Value
Partn.Funct Partner Name
AG S old-to party 3900XX VOil Germany
LF Vendor 4900XX Saudi Arabian Oil
RE Bill-to party 3900XX VOil Germany
RG Payer 3900XX VOil Germany
RS Invoicing Party 4900XX Saudi Arabian Oil
WE Ship-to party 3900XX VOil Germany

ad) Choose Goto→ Items→ Item status and notice the information about
referenced quantities.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 61



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Field Name Value
Quantity Sales 0,000 M15
Quantity Purchase 0,000 M15

ae) Choose Goto→ Items→ Portfolio and press the Display Portfolio
Detail icon. Notice that you do not need to determine the portfolio,
as the contract is two-sided and represents both purchase and sales
quantities for the item.

af) Choose Goto→ Items→ Schedule Lines and notice the information
about the schedule line overview to prove the purchase and sales deal
scheduled for same date.

Field Name Value
Schedule Line Date, Sales 24.03.2007
Cumulative Order Quantity in 500.000
Sales Units
Sales Order Unit of Measure BB6
Schedule Line Date, Purchasing 24.03.2007
Quantity Ordered Against this 500.000
Purchase Requisition
Purchase Order Unit of Measure BB6

ag) Choose Goto→ Header→ Status.
Notice the traffic light indicators for completeness check and current
application status.

Field Name Value
Completeness check Green light
Status set Blank field

ah) Press Save and note the trade contract number.
2. Process the trading contract created at the previous step. Check the document

status, release the trading contract, and generate follow-on documents for
the purchase and sales sides. Note the document numbers. Check the data
relevant for business logic in follow-on documents and continue forming the
document flow accordingly.
a) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Change to

reach transaction WB22 - Change Trading Contract.
Continued on next page

62 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Enter the following data at the screen.

Field Name Value
Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from step # 1.ah)

b) Press Enter to go to trading contract overview.
c) Choose Goto→ Header→ Status (or press F8) and notice the

document status.

Field Name Value
Status set K Open

d) Select status: L Released and press the Set status icon.
Notice that the status has changed.

Field Name Values
Status set L Released

e) Press Save and the system will display the messageTrading
contract IOG100-## is saved.

f) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Change to
reach transaction WB22 ñ Change Trading Contract.
Enter the following data at the screen.

Field Name Value
Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from step # 1.ah)

Do not press Enter.
g) Press CTRL+F7 to create follow-on documents or choose Trading

Contract→ Create Follow→ On Documents to execute this task.
The system will display the message Trading contract
IOG100-## and follow-on documents are saved.

h) Press Enter to go to the trading contract overview.
i) Choose Goto→ Header→ Status.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 63



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Notice the traffic light indicators for completeness check and current
application status.

Field Name Value
Completeness check Green light
Quantity check Green light
Finance document check Green light
Follow-on Documents Created Green light
Status set L Released

j) Choose Goto→ Items→ Item status and notice the information about
referenced quantities.

Field Name Value
Quantity Sales 79.493,647 M15
Quantity Purchase 79.493,647 M15

k) Choose Environment→ Overviews→ Document Flow in the menu or
press SHIFT+CTRL+0 to look at the document flow under the trading
contract. Notice the document numbers and statuses.

Field Name Value
Sales order number
Delivery Status Red light
Invoice Status Red light
Purchase order number
Delivery Status Red light
Invoice Status Red light

l) On the Trading contract document flow screen, select the Purchase
order number and choose Display Document.

m) In the purchase order, look at the the data at item detail level on the
Delivery tab.

Field Name Value
Good Receipt Checkbox is selected

Continued on next page

64 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

n) Notice the data at item detail level on the Invoice tab.

Field Name Value
Invoice Receipt Checkbox is selected
GR-Based Invoice Verification Checkbox is selected

o) Notice the data at item detail level on the Global Trade tab.

Field Name Value
Trading Contract ## (the contract number from

previous step # 1.ah)
Item Class Standard Item

p) Press F3 to get back to the Trading contract document flow screen.
q) Select the Sales order number and choose Display Document .
r) Notice the data at item detail level on the Global Trade tab.

Field Name Value
Trading Contract ## (the contract number from

previous step # 1.ah)
Item Class Standard Item

s) Choose Environment→ Status Overview notice the status of the data
on header and position levels.

Field Name Values
Delivery status Not delivered
Delivery complete Complete item data
Billing doc. complete Complete item data

t) PressF3 four times to get back to Change Trading Contract screen.
u) Leave the transaction and do not save changes.

3. The vendor delivers the material item ARAB_HEAVY-## on an FOB
basis under the purchase order (created at previous step #2.o). Process this
logistics operation in the Trading Execution Workbench and create a material
document to post the data in the system.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 65



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

a) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Training Execution Workbench→
Execute to reach transaction WTEW ñ Execute or choose Logistics→
SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Change to reach transaction WB22 -
Change Trading Contract.

b) Enter the following data on the screen.

Field Name Value
Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step # 1.ah)

Do not press Enter.
c) Press F9 or choose Environment→ Trading Execution Workbench to

go to the TEW in Execute mode.
d) Set up business process definition data

Parameter name Parameter value
Task
Group 0002 Stock Shipment
Step 0010 Goods Receipt
Mode 0001 Create
Previous Step 0002 Trading Contract

(Purchasing Side)
TEW Type 0001 Standard
Selection Intervals of Outbound
Documents
Selection Step 0001 Trading Contract
Selection criteria 0500 Trading contract

e)

Field Name Value
0500 Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step # 1.ah)

f) Choose Edit→ Data Selection or press F7.
The system returns the message Select Source Documents
screen area.

Continued on next page

66 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

g) Select the purchasing document number in the header data area.
Choose Edit→ Execute Action or press F8 to generate follow-on
documents.
The system runs transaction MIGO to create a required material
document.

h) Look through the data in the material document on the Material,
Quantity,Where, PO data, Partner, Additional Quantities, Excise Duty,
andGlobal Trade tabs at item detail level.

i) Set the Item OK indicator, choose the Check button, and process the
message Enter Stor. Location.

j) Enter the following data on the Where tab at item detail level.

Field Name Value
Storage Location TRAN

k) Set the Item OK indicator and choose the Check button. The system
returns the message Document is OK.

l) Choose the Post button to save the document in the system. The system
returns the following messages.

Message class Message short text System message
number

MIGO Material 012
document
500000XXXX
posted

MIGO Document is OK 026
WB2B_ACTION Goods Receipt 301

– 500000XXXX
200X was saved

m) Take note of the material document number and press F3 to leave
the transaction.

4. The vendor delivers the invoice for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## with
pricing on an FOB basis under the purchase order and material document
(created at a previous step # 3.m). Process this logistics operation in the
Trading Execution Workbench and create a vendor Invoice to post the data in
the system.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 67



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

a) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Training Execution Workbench→
Execute to reach transaction WTEW - Execute or choose Logistics→
SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Change to reach transaction WB22
ñ Change Trading Contract.

b) Enter the following data on the screen.

Field Name Value
Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step # 1.ah)

Do not press Enter.
c) Press F9 or choose Environment→ Trading Execution Workbench to

go to the TEW in Execute mode.
d) Set up business process definition data.

Parameter name Parameter value
Task
Group 0002 Stock Shipment
Step 0020 Invoice

Verification
Mode 0001 Create
Previous Step 0010 Goods Receipt
TEW Type 0001 Standard
Selection Intervals of Outbound
Documents
Selection Step 0001 Trading Contract
Selection criteria 0500 Trading Contract

e)

Field Name Value
0500 Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step #1.ah)

f) ChooseEdit→ Data Selectionto go to the Select Source Documents
screen area.

g) Select the material document number in the header data area.

Continued on next page

68 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

h) Choose Edit→ Execute Action to generate follow-on documents.
The system runs transaction MIRO to create a required invoice
verification. Look through the data in the invoice document in the
columns at item detail level.

i) Enter the data in the Header area on the Basic Data tab as follows:

Field Name Value
Amount 25.000.000
Calculate tax Checkbox is selected

j) Press Enter and notice the status of the balance in the Header area.

Field Name Value
Balance Green Light / 0,00 USD

k) Press the Simulate button to model postings in financial accounting.
l) Choose the Post button to save the document in the system. The system

returns the following messages.

Message class Message short text System message
number

M8 Document no. 060
5105600XXX
created

M8 Invoice 496
document
still contains
messages

m) Take note of the invoice document number and press F3 to leave the
transaction.

5. The ownership title for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## has to transferred
to VOil DE (customer 3900##) under the sales order created at a previous
step # 3.m. Process this logistics operation in the Trading Execution
Workbench and create an outbound delivery to post the data in the system.
a) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Training Execution Workbench→

Execute to reach transaction WTEW - Execute or choose Logistics→
SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Change to reach transaction WB22
ñ Change Trading Contract.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 69



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

b) Enter the following data on the screen.

Field Name Value
Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step # 1.ah)

Do not press Enter.
c) Choose Environment→ Trading Execution Workbench to enter the

TEW in Execute mode
d) Set up business process definition data.

Parameter name Parameter value
Task
Group 0002 Stock Shipment
Step 0011 Outbound Delivery

for Delivery via
Warehouse

Mode 0001 Create
Previous Step 0003 Trading Contract

(Sales Side)
TEW Type 0001 Standard
Selection Intervals of Outbound
Documents
Selection Step 0001 Trading Contract
Selection criteria 0500 Trading Contract

e)

Field Name Value
0500 Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step #1.ah)

f) Choose Edit→ Data Selection to enter the Select Source Documents
screen area.

g) Select the sales order document number in the header data area.
h) ChooseEdit→ Execute Action to generate follow-on documents.

Continued on next page

70 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

The system runs transaction VL01N to create a required outbound
delivery document

i) Enter the following data on the Create Outbound Delivery with Order
Reference screen.

Field Name Value
Shipping point 1001 Transit

International
Selection date Current date
Order #### (the sales order number

from previous step # 3.m)
From item blank
To item 9999

j) Press Enter.
Look through the data in the outbound delivery document in the
columns at header and item detail level.

k) Enter the following data in the Header area on the Picking tab.

Field Name Value
Picked Quantity 500.000
Storage Location TRAN
Valuation Type UNTAX

l) Press Enter, choose Goto→ Header→ Processing, and notice the
statuses in the Overall Status area.

Field Name Value
Document Status Checked
Picking C Fully picked WM
Activities No WM order required
Confirmation C Fully confirm Pick
Pack Packing not required
Goods Issue A Not yet started
Billing Docs A Not invoiced

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 71



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

m) Choose Edit→ Incompleteness and process the messages, if there are
any. If not, press F3 to go back to the Outbound Delivery: Header
Status screen.

n) Choose Edit→ Post Goods Issueto save the document in the system.
The system returns the following messages.

Message class Message short text System message
number

VL Item 000010: 037
delivery split
because of
different
shipping
points

VL Outbound 311
Delivery
800XXXXX has
been saved

VL Order cannot 461
be delivered
(see long
text)

WB2B_ACTION Outbnd 301
Delivery for
Deliv. via
Warehouse
800XXXXX was
saved

o) Take note of the outbound delivery document number and press F3
to leave the transaction.

6. The ownership title for material item ARAB_HEAVY-## has to be
transferred to VOil DE (customer 3900## ) under the sales order created at a
previous step #3.m. Process this logistics operation in the Trading Execution
Workbench and create a billing document to post the data in the system.
a) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Training Execution Workbench→

Execute to reach transaction WTEW - Execute or choose Logistics→
SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Change to reach transaction WB22
ñ Change Trading Contract.

b) Enter the following data on the screen.

Continued on next page

72 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Field Name Value
Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step # 1.ah)

Do not press Enter.
c) Set up business process definition data.

Parameter name Parameter value
Task
Group 0002 Stock Shipment
Step 0022 Billing for

Delivery via Warehouse
Mode 0001 Create
Previous Step 0011 Outbound Delivery

for Delivery via
Warehouse

TEW Type 0001 Standard
Selection Intervals of Outbound
Documents
Selection Step 0001 Trading Contract
Selection criteria 0500 Trading contract

Field Name Values
0500 Trading Contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step # 1.ah)

d) Choose Edit→ Data Selection to enter the Select Source Documents
screen area.

e) Select the outbound delivery document number in the header data area.
Choose Edit→ Execute Action to generate follow-on documents.

f) The system runs transaction VF01 to create a required billing document.
Look through the data in the billing document in the columns at header
and item detail level.

g) Choose Billing document→ Save to save the document in the system.
The system returns the following messages.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 73



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Message class Message short text System message
number

VF Document 311
9000XXXX has
been saved

WB2B_ACTION Billing for 301
Delivery via
Warehouse
9000XXXX was
saved

h) Take note of the billing document number and press F3 to leave the
transaction.

7. The trading contract has been executed. You need to run the report and look
through the completed document flow that was generated under the contract.
a) Choose Logistics→ SAP GTM→ Trading Contract→ Display to

reach transaction WB23 ñ Display Trading Contract.
b) Enter the following data on the screen.

Field Name Value
0500 Trading contract ## (input the contract number

from previous step # 1.ah)

Do not press Enter.
c) Choose Environment→ Overviews→ Document Flow to look the

document flow under the trading contract. Notice the document
numbers and statuses.

Field Name Values
Sales order number
Delivery Status Green light
Invoice Status Green light
Purchase order number
Delivery Status Green light
Invoice Status Green light

d) On the Trading contract document flow screen, select the purchase
order number and choose Display Document.

Continued on next page

74 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

e) In the purchase order, notice the data at item detail level on the
Purchase Order History tab.

Field Name Value
Goods Receipt Document number created in

step 3
Invoice Receipt Document number created in

step 4

f) In the purchase order, look at the data at header level on the Status tab.

Field Name Values
Ordered 500.000 BB6
Delivered 500.000 BB6
Still to be delivered 0 BB6
Invoiced 500.000 BB6

g) Press F3 to go back to the Trading contract document flow screen.
h) Select the Sales order number and choose Display Document.
i) Choose Environment→ Status Overview and look at the status data on

header and position levels.

Field Name Value
Delivery status Fully delivered
Goods issue status Complete goods issue
Billing status Fully invoiced

j) Choose Goto→ Document Flow to look the documents created under
the sales order.

Field Name Value
Standard Order Document number created on

step 2
Outbound Delivery Document number created on

step 5
Picking Request Document number created on

step 5

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 75



Unit 2: Physical Oil and Gas Commodity Trading IOG100

Field Name Value
GD goods issue: dlvr. Document number created on

step 5
Invoice Document number created on

step 6
Accounting document Document number created on

step 6

k) Press F3 four times to go back to the Display Trading Contract screen.
l) Press Enter to go to the Display Trading Contract screen and press the

Rotate Document Flow button to open the document flow pad.
m) Press the Expand all nodes button to look the document flow under

the trading contract.
n) Press F3 to leave the transaction.

76 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Global Trade Management

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï List the typical business process in the global trade of oil commodities
ï Describe the major functions in trade management with GTM
ï Recognize the document flow to be generated under trade contracts
ï Operate logistics transactions in GTM with SAP for Oil&Gas

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 77



Unit Summary IOG100

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï List the typical business process in the global trade of oil commodities
ï Describe the major functions in trade management with GTM
ï Recognize the document flow to be generated under trade contracts
ï Operate logistics transactions in GTM with SAP for Oil&Gas

78 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 3
International Export/Import

Operations

Unit Overview
The International Export/Import Operations of raw materials have to comply all
the international laws and rules that have been agreed and taken into consideration
in the Trading phase (Incoterms). The flow of materials and services from vendors
to customers is theoretically controlled and organized by Schedulers who are
responsible for daily operations as per planning cycles (usually the weekly/monthly
cycles). Tanker-, Barge-, Rail-, Truck- and Pipeline-programming for crude, feed
stocks, semi-finished products, base oil transfers, purchases and sales (primary
distribution). Resulting slates (basically shopping lists) are bridging Trading and
Transportation, i.e. they are the basis for all nominations to suppliers (or vendors).

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Understand Tradeŕs and Scheduleŕs interaction
ï Explain typical business process in International Export/Import Operations

(Marine scenario)
ï Supply contracts
ï General understanding of Bulk Scheduling Management (TSW ñ Trader's

and Scheduler's Workbench)
ï Nomination processing and document flow when Bulk Marine Voyage

Scheduling
ï Explain concept of Transport Unit and Vehicle
ï Understand the tasks and operations to be executed under Freight Contract
ï Explain Laytime and Demurrage Calculation
ï Explain the concept of Stock Projection Worksheet (SPW)
ï Operate with TSW document flow
ï Understand the purposes of Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 79



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Unit Contents
Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management .. . . . . . . . . 81

Exercise 3: International Export/Import Operations (raw material).
Contract Operations Management .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104
Exercise 4: International Export/Import Operations (raw material).
Marine Scheduling - Freight Contract. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .113

Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .125
Exercise 5: International Export/Import Operations (raw material). Bulk
Operational Inventory Management ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .143

80 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule
Management
Lesson Overview
Lesson Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management explains the
Business Scenario of Supplying crude oil by means of Marine transportation.
Supply contracts must exist between with Vendors where terms and conditions as
quantities, materials, validity periods, payment terms and pricing are defined. This
is handled by Contract Operations Management. Once the contractual conditions
are define, the Scheduling and Transportation of the raw material is realized using
SAP for Oil&Gas (TSW ñ Trader's and Scheduler's Workbench). TSW provides
the relevant master data to model the supply chain. The stock projection, planning,
and nomination processes enable the scheduler to schedule bulk shipments while
taking into account supply, demand, and available transportation.
You use the marine scheduling functions to plan marine shipments, including the
loading and unloading of product, handling the use of lightering vessels, and
numerous ship-shore events. The information supplied by the marine scheduling
functions, includes the most recent data concerning nominations, vessel progress
during a voyage, terminal and port status, and the inventory at each location.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Understand Tradeŕs and Scheduleŕs interaction
ï Explain typical business process in International Export/Import Operations

(Marine scenario)
ï Supply contracts
ï General understanding of Bulk Scheduling Management (TSW ñ Trader's

and Scheduler's Workbench)
ï Nomination processing and document flow when Bulk Marine Voyage

Scheduling

Business Example
Continuing with the scenario started in the previous Unit (UNIT 02: Physical Oil
and Gas Commodity Trading) where International Trade VOil INT (Company
code = 1000) arrange a quarterly volume for certain type of crude oil to be
purchased from supplier Saudi Arabian Oil (Vendor = 400003) to fulfill the
requirements VOil DE (Customer = 300000). The receiving terminal is Triest.
The raw materials (crude oil) is shipped from the different load ports called
origin locations O (eg. Location = Sidi Kerir in Egypt) to Triest destiny location
D (Location = TRIEST) with chartered tankers (Transport system: MARINE
INT). The tanker size varies but cannot exceed a maximum according to the

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 81



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

constraints of the receiving installations and the constraints of the Triest harbour.
It is stored jointly with the same grades of other shippers, i.e. there is no dedicated
storage for the individual shipper. The 3rd party operator plans and decides on
behalf of the shippers. Each shipper has to observe rules related to the maximum
allowed inventory and storage time in Triest. The shippers are only allowed to use
the tankage in Triest for buffering the required stocks for pipeline shipments in
batches, not for long term storage. Non observance of these rules leads to waiting
time and demurrage for the future tanker arrivals of the relevant shippers.

Supply of Crude Oil based on Contracts (Trade)
It is common practice to negotiate term purchase contracts with major suppliers of
crude (e.g. Aramco, Saudi Arabia; Statoil, NorwayÖ). These deals are usually
concluded by Global and/or Regional Headquarter Trading organizations, i.e.
different entities within the company. This transaction is also called a TRADE and
has been studied in the previous unit.
Oil International has several contracts with different suppliers on a term basis.
Beside the term deals spot contracts are concluded as required.
Purchase Contracts of Oil International
The receiving plant for all this deals is the underlying plant of transport system
MARINE INT representing a virtual location where the ëflash titleí of Oil
International passes through.

Figure 30: Supply of Crude Oil based on Contracts (Trade)

82 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

International Trading negotiates with the receiving Local Affiliate at Triest a
Purchase Contract for the Crude oil that has been purchased in the international
market.
Sales contract Oil International where the buyer is Oil Local Affiliate
The customer here is Oil Local Affiliate. There are also similar contracts with
other affiliates in reality. Oil International trading allocates the purchased crude
according to the crude economics of the corporation and the economics of the
affiliates.
The sales are performed out of the underlying plant of transport system MARINE
INT (as for the purchase contracts before).
Purchase contract of Oil Local Affiliate where the vendor is Oil International
Normally this contract is not matching the sales contract Oil International to Oil
Local Affiliate in terms of number of items because of the Incoterms. Depending
on the conditions agreed, if the final buyer (Oil Local Affiliate) is responsible for
the transport or if the supplier of Crude is responsible for the transport different
Incoterms apply, the business is different and the follow on transactions in SAP
are different.
The purchase of Oil Local Affiliate is done into plant 1107 (TRIEST terminal)
so that the scenario is the second case described, the supplier is responsible for
the transport.

Contract Operations Management
Different agreements take place between the different parties: Supplier, Oil
International and Oil Local Affiliate for the Supply of the Crude to the Terminal.
In these agreements conditions and responsabilities of the deals are fixed. These
conditions have to be considered by Schedulers as well as all the results coming
from the Planning and Optimization area. Global headquarters provides official
publisher information, i.e. quotes from Platts, Reuters, Argus, LORÖ, for the
international business (copy right, needs to be purchased). There are also local
quotes available like OMR in Germany.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 83



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Figure 31: Contract Operations Management

Merchants tend to use short expressions, such as FOB and CIF, to clarify the
distribution of functions, costs and risks related to the transfer of goods from seller
to buyer. But unfortunately misunderstandings frequently arise with respect to the
proper interpretation of these expressions. It was considered important to develop
rules for the interpretation of the trade terms which the parties to the contract
of sale could agree to apply. Incoterms ñ for international commercial terms ñ
constitute these rules of interpretation.
The pricing is nearly 100% based upon a pricing formula, using officially published
quotes, in order to reflect the real market conditions. Quotes are published for
standard products by location (market) and for some crudes (marker crudes) and
feed stocks. Crudes without published quotes are linked to marker crudes plus
differentials for quality and location differences. The formula structures are in
general high or medium complex. Sometimes they are very complex involving
price escalation based upon crude quality (API gravity, Sulfur, ViscosityÖ). It is
also common to use specific price out periods for individual crude grades
Transfer Pricing
Transfer prices are usually market based relative to industry/competitive supply
sources. The transfer price to marketing should match 3rd party market alternative
in the region or around a terminal. Price timing and volumetric flexibility should
be consistent with 3rd party deals. Rack prices should be used where possible (if
available). All major oil companies have defined fairly complex ìBest Practicesî.
Transfer Prices are usually quoted in standard temperature and base unit of
measure and in local currency. This requires the correct conversions for mass /
volume and currency exchange rates.

84 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

Scheduling Business tasks & SAP for Oil&Gas (TSW)
Handling and Confirmation of Movement
Scheduling is responsible for the coordination of a movement from source to
destination. This implies a high degree of communication (telephone, fax, telex,
e-mail), verifying contracts, provide load- / discharge data, fulfill tax and legal
reporting.
Nominations
Tanker, barges, and Trains (high volume transportation) need to be nominated to
suppliers, customers, terminals, pipelines, and rail companies. Rail companies
may only provide the engine and schedule the movement for their rail network. In
case of cross border movements multiple rail companies may be involved.
Each operator (in- or external) has nomination rules that are defined as general
rules or specific for a deal in the contract. Not complying with these rules may or
may not create additional costs (demurrage, overtime, higher pumping tariff Ö).
Nominations are also required for required services like cargo inspection,
forwarding agent, vessel agent Ö
Also in the nomination processes the scheduler needs the highest possible degree
of automation to send out standard nomination documents for the individual
movement or service.
Tanker Scheduling
Based upon the crude pipeline schedule a tanker program (usually called slate)
has to be determined. The slate starts off with already purchased cargoes and the
related tanker. The cargo may already be in transit at sea. If the crude purchase
is confirmed, but not yet loaded and no vessel assigned, the volume is slated
without ship, using the term TBN (to be nominated) for the vessel with the volume
purchased. The timing used is based upon the agreed loading date range and the
anticipated sailing time. Finally the open requirements are determined and the
required arrival range in the pipeline terminal. As a placeholder the crude grade
with the best economics is used and with the highest possible volume to reduce
freight costs. If the actual purchase volume does not match the slated volume, all
succeeding open requirements must be re-scheduled.
Crude and Feed Stock Slate
Based upon the final batch program, the actual and planned cargo arrivals and
the resulting stock projection, the open crude and feed stock requirements are
determined. They are listed on the slate and form the ëpurchasing listë for Global /
Regional / S&D Trading.
Barge Scheduling

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 85



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

The barge schedule is driven by the demand of the receiving distribution terminal,
plus demand of supply sales to customers. There may be a common schedule for
S&D (responsible for deliveries to distribution terminals) and I&W (responsible
for delivered sales to industrial and wholesale customers). The main scenario is the
transportation of purchased product to receiving locations along a major waterway.
Barge Slates
Depending upon the number of barge movements, this slate is done or not. If there
is a limited number, nominations only will do (individual or for a period).

Figure 32: Scheduling tasks: VOIL INT business

86 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

Figure 33: Scheduling tasks: VOIL DE business

Trader's and Scheduler's Workbench (TSW) provides functions for stock projection
and for planning and scheduling bulk shipments using nominations. TSW provides
the relevant master data to model the supply chain. The stock projection, planning,
and nomination processes enable the scheduler to schedule bulk shipments while
taking into account supply, demand, and available transportation.

TSW Overview: Push-Pull Model
Trader push - trading is performed based on market opportunities that the trader
recognizes at least partially independently of the supply chain dynamics at any
given time. These ìdealsî are then placed as scheduling requirements on the
scheduler, who views them in the SPW. That is, these deals are ìpushedî into
the supply chain by the trader.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 87



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Figure 34: TSW Overview: Push-Pull Model

Scheduler pull ñ the supply chain dynamics drive the trader to buy and sell based
on the inventory positions (from the SPWs) within the supply chain, for example,
at the request of the scheduler. That is, the supply chain ìpullsî product from
the trader.

TSW Master Data Overview
TSW allows you to model the supply chain of an oil company, including pipeline
systems, marine routes, customers, vendors, and plants.
Transport system
Transport systems are TSW master data objects that represent stock holding
objects to which you can assign locations. They represent pipelines or marine
routes as they exist in the real world. A transport system is a single, in-transit,
stock-holding object used for inventory management purposes. Depending on
individual requirements for modeling a supply chain, the transport system can
represent a fixed supply route, a supply region, or a mode of transport. Examples
of transport systems are a pipeline system or a marine route.
One of the functions of a transport system is to link the locations in the supply
chain. A transport system should always have two or more assigned locations.
During scheduling, you must assign a transport system to a nomination. A location
can either be an origin for the transport system (supplies product into the transport
system), or the location can be a destination for the transport system (receives

88 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

product from the transport system). You can also define a location as both an
origin and a destination. As a result, the supply network is defined in terms of
injection and discharge points for each transport system.
Location
A location is a fixed point on the supply chain where goods are handled (such as
plants, warehouses, supply sources, and markets). Locations are nodes along a
transport system. You define the business purpose behind a location by assigning
partners to them.
You can also define planning locations, which represent a collection of a number
of real locations, for example a region. This aids scheduling at earlier stages
when schedules need to be generated but specific locations or partners are not yet
definite. Note that planning locations may overlap, that is, a real location may be
included in multiple planning locations, thus providing optimum flexibility when
creating planning views.
Partner role
Using the partner role concept, you can assign certain functions to the different
TSW objects. A location is either a plant, a customer location, or a vendor location
in the real world.
You define TSW partner roles in the master data record used to define business
partners. The partner role includes information about the activities that the
business partner can perform and where the business partner performs these
activities. You can also define stockholding objects, such as plants and storage
locations as partner roles.
You define partner roles based on existing System master data records, such as
a vendor, customer, or plant. Because the partner role defines the activities that
a business partner performs in the TSW supply chain, you must assign transport
systems or locations to the master data record of each partner role.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 89



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Figure 35: TSW Master Data Overview I

Figure 36: TSW Master Data Overview II

90 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

Setup of TSW master data:
ï Define Transport Systems
ï Define Locations
ï Assign Locations to Transport System
ï Define Plants & Storage Locations (with all additional necessary settings)
ï Enhance Material Master for TSW plants / storage locations
ï Define Partner Roles
ï Assign Materials and Partner Roles to Locations
ï Assign Materials to Transport System
ï Define Transport Units, Compartments and Vehicles for TSW

Marine Scenario: Real World versus Document Flow
Schedulers in VOIL INT typically plan marine voyages weeks in advance in
order to ensure that long-term contract based demands for crude from different
customers at various locations Worldwide can be satisfied. For some of these
voyages, VOIL INT manages the necessary master data and organizes the
shipments. For this purpose, nominations are sent to a marine carrier. For other
cases, the sale takes place at the time of loading and therefore VOIL INT is not
concerned with arranging the shipment. Once a movement is executed, a ticket is
created and the movement is posted in system.

Figure 37: Marine Scenario: Real World versus Document Flow

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 91



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

The complete scenario could include all these documents as it is shown in the
slide but not necessarily, it depends on terms and conditions. Document Flow
can consists of a number of documents: Deal, Contract, Nomination, Ticket for
loading (official note sent by a partner containing information about a product
movement, that is real product movement), MM Call-off, TD Shipment, Ticket for
discharging, Sales Call-off, Delivery, Goods Issue.

TSW Nomination
A nomination is the scheduling document used to communicate between TSW and
the carrier. You use the nomination to schedule bulk shipments. The system uses
nominations as the basis for generating subsequent SAP system documents, such
as deliveries and shipping notifications. A nomination typically has several line
items, which you create or change according to stock levels and planning proposals
displayed in the SPW. The TSW nomination supports several movement scenarios.

Figure 38: TSW Nomination

The nomination involves the following activities:
ï Creating and changing planned material shipments, which the system

uses when generating the SPW for locations, thus enabling the planned
replenishment of locations.

ï Communicating with the carrier, customer and all other parties which are
related with the transport.

ï Providing the necessary information to other SAP System processes, such
as to generate ñ Transportation and Distribution (TD) shipments as well
as all other associated documents.

92 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

Exercise 3: International Export/Import
Operations (raw material). Contract
Operations Management
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Display documents related to the TSW scheduling activities
ï Display the master data of all supply chain objects involved in the scheduling

activities (e.g. materials, transport system and locations)
ï Display nominations and tickets to explain transportation of crude oil from

port Sidi Kerir to Triest via VLCC marine
ï Display and explain the document flow

Business Example
You are working as a scheduler for marine movements of crude. Your department
is responsible for fulfilling the different demands by scheduling crude oil transfers
from Sidi Kerir. You have to check the appropriate purchase contract and
nominations to fulfill all the requirements of this business scenario.

Task 1:
You purchase crude oil from a vendor in the Sidi Kerir port. You check a TSW
Transport System and the other master data necessary for a marine transport
scenario.
1. Display the TSW Transport SystemMARINE DE

Check the following details:

Shipping type: ___________________________
Mode of transport: ___________________________
TS In-transit Plant ___________________________
TS In-transit Storage Location ___________________________
Plan type: ___________________________

Are the locations SIDI KERIR and TRIEST assigned to the TS?
___________________________
Is the material ARAB_HEAVY-## assigned to the TS?
___________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 93



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

2. Change the TSW Transport SystemMARINE DE and assign the material
ARAB_HEAVY-##
Enter the following details for the material:

SPW UoM: M15
Rolling Period: 90 (days)
Conversion factor: 0
Days in past: 10 (days)
Plan type: NPL (no planning)

3. Assign the material ARAB_HEAVY-## to the TSW locations TRIEST and
SIDI KERIR.

Inventory UoM: M15
Max Inventory 6.289.804,482 M15
Rolling Period: 110 (days)
Conversion factor: 1
Days in past: 100 (days)

Task 2:
The marine scheduler wants to view the purchase contract and check the TSW
relevant data.
1. Display the purchase contract and select the tab Purchasing document per

material. Search for material ARAB_HEAVY-##, Purchase doc type ìKî
and Plant 1180.
Note the contract number
___________________________
Check if the item is TSW relevant.
What is the validity period for this contract?
___________________________
What are the payment terms for this contract?
___________________________
What is the Incoterms for this contract?
___________________________

Continued on next page

94 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

2. What are the agreement quantity, price and price unit for ARAB_HEAVY-##
___________________________
___________________________
___________________________

Task 3:
Display a nomination SK2006-04.
1. What is the transport system for this nomination?

___________________________
What is the vehicle for this nomination?
___________________________
What is the general status of the nomination?
___________________________
Is the nomination balanced?
___________________________
What is the reference document for the first item and what scenario was
executed?
___________________________

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 95



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Solution 3: International Export/Import
Operations (raw material). Contract
Operations Management
Task 1:
You purchase crude oil from a vendor in the Sidi Kerir port. You check a TSW
Transport System and the other master data necessary for a marine transport
scenario.
1. Display the TSW Transport SystemMARINE DE

Check the following details:

Shipping type: ___________________________
Mode of transport: ___________________________
TS In-transit Plant ___________________________
TS In-transit Storage Location ___________________________
Plan type: ___________________________

Are the locations SIDI KERIR and TRIEST assigned to the TS?
___________________________
Is the material ARAB_HEAVY-## assigned to the TS?

Continued on next page

96 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

___________________________
a) Display the TSW Transport SystemMARINE DE

Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Master
Data→ Transport System→ Display

Shipping type: 10 Marine (TSW)
Mode of transport: 10 Marine (TSW)
TS In-transit Plant 1180 Marine DE
TS In-transit Storage Location TRAN TSW Marine

Are the locations SIDI KERIR and TRIEST assigned to the TS?
Choose Locations
Please scroll down to see your locations.
Is the material ARAB_HEAVY-## assigned to the TS?
Choose TS/Materials
Not yet.

2. Change the TSW Transport SystemMARINE DE and assign the material
ARAB_HEAVY-##
Enter the following details for the material:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 97



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

SPW UoM: M15
Rolling Period: 90 (days)
Conversion factor: 0
Days in past: 10 (days)
Plan type: NPL (no planning)

a) Change the TSW Transport System:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Master
Data→ Transport System→ Change.

Transport System: MARINE DE

Choose Enter.
Press icon TS/Materials and assign the following material:

Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##

Select the material and press icon Details and enter the following
details for the material:

SPW UoM: M15
Rolling Period: 90 (days)
Conversion factor: 0
Days in past: 10
Plan type: NPL (no planning)

Choose Back and Save
3. Assign the material ARAB_HEAVY-## to the TSW locations TRIEST and

SIDI KERIR.

Continued on next page

98 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

Inventory UoM: M15
Max Inventory 6.289.804,482 M15
Rolling Period: 110 (days)
Conversion factor: 1
Days in past: 100 (days)

a) Assign the material to the TSW locations:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Master
Data→ Node Location→ Change

Location ID: TRIEST

Choose Enter.
Select the Materials tab.

Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##

Mark the item line and choose Details

Inventory UoM: M15
Max Inventory 6.289.804,482 M15

Select the SPW related tab.
Enter data:

Rolling Period: 110 (days)
Conversion factor: 1
Days in past: 100 (days)

Choose Back and Save.
Repeat this for the Location SIDI KERIR

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 99



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Task 2:
The marine scheduler wants to view the purchase contract and check the TSW
relevant data.
1. Display the purchase contract and select the tab Purchasing document per

material. Search for material ARAB_HEAVY-##, Purchase doc type ìKî
and Plant 1180.
Note the contract number
___________________________
Check if the item is TSW relevant.
What is the validity period for this contract?
___________________________
What are the payment terms for this contract?
___________________________
What is the Incoterms for this contract?
___________________________
a) Check purchase contract:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Purchasing→ Outline
Agreement→ Contract→ Display.
Choose F4. Select the Purchasing document per material tab. Select the
contract by searching for the material ARAB_HEAVY-##, Purchase
doc type ìKî and Plant 1180.
Display the contract.
Select the item line and choose TSW Details: The item is TSW relevant.
Choose Header Data. Incoterms: FOB
Validity period for this contract 01.01.2006 till 31.12.2007
The payment terms for this contract 0010 ñ Within 30 days Due net

2. What are the agreement quantity, price and price unit for ARAB_HEAVY-##
___________________________
___________________________

Continued on next page

100 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

___________________________
a)

Agreement quantity 5.000.000 BBL
Price 55,03 USD
Price unit 55,03 USD per 1 BB6

Task 3:
Display a nomination SK2006-04.
1. What is the transport system for this nomination?

___________________________
What is the vehicle for this nomination?
___________________________
What is the general status of the nomination?
___________________________
Is the nomination balanced?
___________________________
What is the reference document for the first item and what scenario was
executed?

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 101



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

___________________________
a) Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →

Workbench→ Nomination→ Display
In the nomination overview tab Choose Nomination Number
Enter SK2006-04 and press Enter

The transport system for this MARINE DE
nomination
The vehicle used for this BRITANIS
nomination

Choose tab Status Overview

The general status of the COMP
nomination:

Choose tab Mat.Balance
Nomination is balanced

The reference document for the 4600000004 Item 10
first item

Choose S.Type field and check possible entries:

The scenario 20 was executed Purchase into in-transit /
Contract

102 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Contract Operations and Bulk Schedule Management

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Understand Tradeŕs and Scheduleŕs interaction
ï Explain typical business process in International Export/Import Operations

(Marine scenario)
ï Supply contracts
ï General understanding of Bulk Scheduling Management (TSW ñ Trader's

and Scheduler's Workbench)
ï Nomination processing and document flow when Bulk Marine Voyage

Scheduling

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 103



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract
Lesson Overview
Trader's and Scheduler's Workbench (TSW) includes functions to support
the process of Marine Scheduling. The following functions are included in
marine scheduling: Berth Scheduling, Fleet Management, Freight Contracts,
Measurement Comparison, Laytime and Demurrage Calculation. Within this
lesson functions Freight Contracts and Laytime and Demurrage Calculation will
be considered.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Explain concept of Transport Unit and Vehicle
ï Understand the tasks and operations to be executed under Freight Contract
ï Explain Laytime and Demurrage Calculation

Business Example
VOil DE has purchased the raw material (crude oil) on FOB basis in a port of
origin and wants to deliver it to the port of destination. The raw material (crude
oil) is shipped from the load port (Location = SIDI KERIR) to Triest unload port
(Location = TRIEST) with chartered tankers (Transport system: MARINE INT).
Freight Contract stores information about the agreements made with a carrier
regarding the movement of product. There are two subtasks to be covered: Freight
agreement and Laytime agreement.

Marine Scheduling ñ Freight Contract
Trader's and Scheduler's Workbench (TSW) includes functions to support the
process of Marine Scheduling. The functions support the scheduling of marine
vessels, handling of port events, tracking of voyages, and arrivals at a port or
terminal.
You use the marine scheduling functions to plan marine shipments, including the
loading and unloading of product, handling the use of lightering vessels, and
numerous ship-shore events. The information supplied by the marine scheduling
functions, includes the most recent data concerning nominations, vessel progress
during a voyage, terminal and port status, and the inventory at each location.
The following functions are included in marine scheduling: Berth Scheduling,
Fleet Management, Freight Contracts, Measurement Comparison, Laytime and
Demurrage Calculation.

104 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

Within this lesson functions Freight Contracts and Laytime and Demurrage
Calculation will be considered.

Figure 39: External service - Transportation

Figure 40: Vehicle structure

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 105



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

In Traderís and Schedulerís Workbench, freight contracts represent agreements
with a vessel carrier and contain the agreed upon terms, conditions and rates for
bulk shipments. You can create freight contracts to represent agreements, such as
time charters, voyage charters, or contracts of affreightment.
Freight Contracts store information about the agreements made with a carrier
regarding the movement of product. Freight Contracts provide data for other
TSW functions, such as the calculation of laytime and demurrage, as well as the
calculation of despatch.
Laytime and Demurrage
Laytime is the time period during which a vessel is at a port or berth. Demurrage
is the contractually agreed penalty that is due when a vessel remains too long at a
location during loading or discharge operations.
The Freight Contract contains the agreed amount of time the vessel is allowed to
spend at a location and the subsequent demurrage rate to be charged when the time
is exceeded. Additionally, the Freight Contract contains the agreement on how
to handle events that can influence laytime, such as delays due to bad weather or
equipment that is out of service on shore.
The Laytime Calculation function calculates laytime based on a freight agreement
and the events you enter in a nomination. If the contractually agreed laytime is
exceeded, the system automatically calculates the potential demurrage liability.
Using the default function for laytime terms, you can define sets of laytime terms
that you can then reuse when creating freight contracts. In this way, you can avoid
having to recreate laytime terms that are frequently used.

Transport Unit Type - Marine
A vehicle is the means by which you transport product from one location to
another. In TD, a vehicle is defined in a master data record. This is done for
the following reasons:
ï Each vehicle is unique and consists of a fixed number of transport units
ï Each transport unit is unique and consists of a fixed number of compartments
ï Each compartment is unique and is used as the basis to schedule and load

product for transport.
ï The vehicle type defines the mode of transport, such as marine and other

vehicle attributes. When creating a vehicle you must first choose a vehicle
type.

106 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

Figure 41: Vehicle structure

The vehicle is defined as a logical combination of transport units within the
vehicle master data record. The vehicle type determines what type of transport
units can be assigned to a vehicle. A vehicle consists of transport units. At least
one transport unit must have loading capacity. The mode of transport of the
vehicle type must match the mode of transport of the transport unit type for each
transport unit assigned to the vehicle.
Certain vehicle attributes are stored in the vehicle master data record, while other
vehicle attributes are defined for the vehicle type in Customizing and are copied
into the master data record when creating a vehicle. Vehicle attributes pertaining
to the physical dimensions of the vehicle are defined when creating vehicle master
data. The maximum weight and volume are calculated from the transport units and
their compartments. Physical dimensions (height, length, width) can be defined.

Freight Contract processing
The maintenance transactions for sales and purchase contracts include data
fields where you can maintain freight contract information, such as charter
party, laytime, and demurrage agreements. For example, to create a freight
contract for chartering a vessel, you create a purchase contract and add the freight
contract information in the TSW Details. You access the TSW Details dialog box
from the maintenance transactions for sales and purchase contracts. The TSW
Details dialog box includes tabs and fields for freight contract information. In
Customizing you can also define a customer-specific tab.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 107



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Figure 42: Freight Contract - TSW relevance

You can view TSW Details at item level of sales and purchase orders, sales and
purchase contracts, and returns. If you double-click on the document number
in the nomination, you can navigate directly to the documents assigned to a
nomination item.
You access TSW Details by choosing TSW Dtls at the bottom of the screen. The
TSW Details dialog box appears. TSW Details are on the following tab pages:
ï Scheduling
ï Nomination
ï Charter 1
ï Charter 2
ï Laytime
ï Laytime Terms

Freight Contract - TSW Details
Scheduling
The following data is displayed in the Scheduling section of TSW Details:
ï TSW relevance indicator
This determines if the document is relevant for stock projection. When the system
finds an order that has been set as TSW relevant in Customizing, this indicator is
set automatically. When the system sets the relevance indicator, you can no longer

108 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

change the relevance indicator. If the indicator is not set automatically, you can
manually set the indicator. You can set the relevance indicator so that you can
reference the document item in the nomination.
ï Reference document number
ï Date range (deal validity periods) for SD or MM document items
ï Location or planning location
You can enter a TSW location or planning location in TSW Details.
ï Multiple modes of transport (MoT)
You can assign multiple MoTs to the order or contract item. Depending on
the Customizing settings for TSW nominations, you may need to specify the
scheduling MoT in the Multiple MoT dialog box in TSW Details.
ï Events
You can assign events to order or contract items and you can assign a Mandatory
or Not allowed attribute to events. This determines whether the event in the
nomination is mandatory or not allowed for the location you have entered. The
time, for which the event is mandatory, is either added to or subtracted from the
number of days entered.
ï Deal information
ï Tolerances for prorate calculation
For prorate calculation, you can enter upper tolerances, no tolerances, or unlimited
tolerances.
ï Amendment control for Location Balancing
You can allow amendment control in Location Balancing. You can enter
tolerances, within which it is possible to amend quantities.
If you want to activate Group Amendment, you must also activate Amendment
Control.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 109



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Figure 43: Freight Contract - Ship Charter

Charter 1
Details on charter agreements, such as:
ï Laydays start (the first day when the ship arrives according to charter

agreement) must fall before Laydays end (the last day when the ship arrives
as stated in the charter agreement).

ï You can determine or exclude locations for loading or discharging.
ï You can set whether or not products or product groups can be transported on

the chartered vehicle.
Charter 2
Details on charter agreements, such as:
ï Declarations by the parties to the agreement; here, for example, the owner or

the charterer can determine the availability of the vessel.
ï Cargo size; here, you can determine, for example, the minimum quantity that

is to be transported.
ï Performance; here, you can determine data such as speeds.
ï Bunker; here, you can enter various consumption rates.
Laytime
Laytime and demurrage details are used to calculate the laytime and demurrage
in a nomination.

110 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

Laytime Terms
The detailed data on laytime terms is used to calculate the laytime in the
nomination.

Laytime and Demurrage Calculation
Laytime is the time period during which a vessel is at a port or berth. Demurrage
is the contractually agreed penalty that is due when a vessel remains too long at a
location during load or discharge operations.
Laytime Calculation
The laytime calculation is a function that uses the laytime agreement from freight
contracts and the specific laytime events saved in the carrier nomination. In
the freight contract you maintain information about the allowed laytime of a
vessel during loading, discharging, or lighterage. In the carrier nomination you
maintain the events that are relevant for laytime calculation. Additionally, you can
customize how the system handles events that can influence the allowed laytime,
such as weather conditions or facility down time at the port.
The system takes the following into account for the calculation of laytime:
Actual laytime: for the calculation of actual laytime (and demurrage), the system
checks the events from the carrier nomination.
Potential laytime: the system calculates potential laytime based on the quantity in
the nomination and the pump rate given in the contract or in the nomination.
The system uses the formula: Laytime potentially subject to demurrage = Total
laytime incurred - (allowed laytime + excludable delays).

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 111



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Figure 44: Laytime and Demurrage Calculation

Demurrage Calculation
Demurrage is the contractually agreed penalty for exceeding the laytime (the
time allowed for loading, discharging, or lighterage). The system calculates the
demurrage fee based on the potential or actual laytime, the contractually allowed
laytime, and the demurrage fee maintained in the freight contract.
The system uses the formula: Demurrage costs = net demurrage time X net
demurrage rate X demurrage factor.
You maintain the demurrage rates and demurrage factors as pricing conditions
in Customizing. If the contractually agreed laytime is exceeded, the system
automatically calculates demurrage. You can configure the system to show the
demurrage amount as a work list item.

112 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

Exercise 4: International Export/Import
Operations (raw material). Marine
Scheduling - Freight Contract.
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Display and explain Freight Contract
ï Create a nomination for free-on-board sales
ï Assign Freight Contract to the nomination
ï Display and explain demurrage calculation

Business Example
You are working as a scheduler for marine movements of crude. Your department
is responsible for controlling Freight contracts (demurrage calculation) and
different schedules of marines to transfer crude oil from Sidi Kerir.
You have to create nomination to fulfill all the requirements of this business
scenario.

Task 1:
You have been informed that a new Freight Contract has been signed and you
have to check the locations, rules and events on what the demurrage depends to
schedule a new voyage.
1. Display the Freight contract and select the tab Purchasing document per

vendor. Search for vendor 400017 and Purchase doc type ìKî.
Choose the document according the following table:

FC Number User group
4600000013 Group 01
4600000014 Group 02
4600000015 Group 03
4600000016 Group 04
4600000017 Group 05
4600000018 Group 06
4600000019 Group 07
4600000020 Group 08

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 113



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

FC Number User group
4600000021 Group 09
4600000022 Group 10
4600000023 Group 11
4600000024 Group 12
4600000025 Group 13
4600000026 Group 14
4600000027 Group 15
4600000028 Group 16
4600000029 Group 17
4600000030 Group 18
4600000031 Group 19
4600000032 Group 20

What is the validity period for this contract?
___________________________
What are the payment terms for this contract?
___________________________
What is the Incoterms for this contract?
___________________________

2. Check if the item is TSW relevant.
What are the laytime start and end events for loading operations:
___________________________________________________
What are the demurrage influencing events in the agreement:
___________________________________________________
Who is responsible for chartering operations:
___________________________________________________
What type and name of vehicle chartered for current contract:
___________________________________________________

Continued on next page

114 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

Task 2:
Create a nomination and put as a reference document for laytime calculation the
freight contract you have reviewed in the previous exercise, check the calculation.
Change the dates for laytime and check results again.
1. Create a nomination and put as a reference document for laytime calculation

freight contract you have reviewed in the previous exercise (task #1), check
the calculation. Change the dates for laytime and check results again.

Nomination No. FCnnnn-## (where nnnn ñ current
calendar year)

Transport System: MARINE DE
Nomination type CARR
Vehicle Number Marine-##

Enter the following item data:

Item 1: Schedule Item Type: O (Origin)
Location ID: SIDI KERIR
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Date: Today's date
Ref. doc. indicator: K (Purchase Contract)
Ref. document: Your purchase contract
Ref.Doc.Item Item number in your contract
FC RDI K (Purchase Contract)
FC-Opt. Ref Doc Your Freight contract
FC-Item Item number in your contract

For the new line item enter the following data:

Item 2: Schedule Item Type: D (Destination)
Location ID: TRIEST
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 115



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

UoM: M15
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)
Date: Today's date + 1 day

Peg the first item for laytime calculation.
Check the demurrage calculation.
Save the nomination.

2. Change the nomination and put actual dates of Hose connected and Hose
disconnected events for the first item.

Event Actual St. Actual St. Actual End Actual End
Date-From Time-From Date To Time To

HOCO Today's 01:00:00 Today's 10:00:00
date date

HODI Today's 23:00:00 Today's 04:00:00
date date + 1 day

Check the demurrage calculation.
Save the nomination.

116 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

Solution 4: International Export/Import
Operations (raw material). Marine
Scheduling - Freight Contract.
Task 1:
You have been informed that a new Freight Contract has been signed and you
have to check the locations, rules and events on what the demurrage depends to
schedule a new voyage.
1. Display the Freight contract and select the tab Purchasing document per

vendor. Search for vendor 400017 and Purchase doc type ìKî.
Choose the document according the following table:

FC Number User group
4600000013 Group 01
4600000014 Group 02
4600000015 Group 03
4600000016 Group 04
4600000017 Group 05
4600000018 Group 06
4600000019 Group 07
4600000020 Group 08
4600000021 Group 09
4600000022 Group 10
4600000023 Group 11
4600000024 Group 12
4600000025 Group 13
4600000026 Group 14
4600000027 Group 15
4600000028 Group 16
4600000029 Group 17
4600000030 Group 18
4600000031 Group 19
4600000032 Group 20

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 117



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

What is the validity period for this contract?
___________________________
What are the payment terms for this contract?
___________________________
What is the Incoterms for this contract?
___________________________
a) Check Freight contract:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Purchasing→ Outline
Agreement→ Contract→ Display
Choose F4. Select the Purchasing document per material tab. Select
the contract by searching for vendor 400017 and Purchase doc type
ìKî:
Choose the document from the generated list according the following
table:

FC Number User group
4600000013 Group 01
4600000014 Group 02
4600000015 Group 03
4600000016 Group 04
4600000017 Group 05
4600000018 Group 06
4600000019 Group 07
4600000020 Group 08
4600000021 Group 09
4600000022 Group 10
4600000023 Group 11
4600000024 Group 12
4600000025 Group 13
4600000026 Group 14
4600000027 Group 15
4600000028 Group 16
4600000029 Group 17

Continued on next page

118 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

FC Number User group
4600000030 Group 18
4600000031 Group 19
4600000032 Group 20

Display the contract.

Choose Header Data. Incoterms: CIF

Validity period for this contract 01.01.2006 till 31.12.2007
The payment terms for this contract 0002 Within 14 days 2 % cash
discount

2. Check if the item is TSW relevant.
What are the laytime start and end events for loading operations:
___________________________________________________
What are the demurrage influencing events in the agreement:
___________________________________________________
Who is responsible for chartering operations:
___________________________________________________
What type and name of vehicle chartered for current contract:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 119



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

___________________________________________________
a) Check if the item is TSW relevant.

Select the item line and choose TSW Details: The item is TSW relevant.
Choose Layt.terms tab.
The laytime start HOCO - Hose connected and HODI - Hose
disconnected end events for loading operations.
The demurrage influencing events in the agreement are:
WEAT ñ Weather
BRKD ñ Breakdown
Choose Charter 2 tab.
The Charterer is responsible for chartering operations.
Choose Charter 1 tab.
APOLLONIA ñ Apollonia, VLCC - Very Large Crude Carrier is
used for current voyage.

Task 2:
Create a nomination and put as a reference document for laytime calculation the
freight contract you have reviewed in the previous exercise, check the calculation.
Change the dates for laytime and check results again.
1. Create a nomination and put as a reference document for laytime calculation

freight contract you have reviewed in the previous exercise (task #1), check
the calculation. Change the dates for laytime and check results again.

Nomination No. FCnnnn-## (where nnnn ñ current
calendar year)

Transport System: MARINE DE
Nomination type CARR
Vehicle Number Marine-##

Enter the following item data:

Item 1: Schedule Item Type: O (Origin)
Location ID: SIDI KERIR
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000

Continued on next page

120 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

UoM: M15
Date: Today's date
Ref. doc. indicator: K (Purchase Contract)
Ref. document: Your purchase contract
Ref.Doc.Item Item number in your contract
FC RDI K (Purchase Contract)
FC-Opt. Ref Doc Your Freight contract
FC-Item Item number in your contract

For the new line item enter the following data:

Item 2: Schedule Item Type: D (Destination)
Location ID: TRIEST
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)
Date: Today's date + 1 day

Peg the first item for laytime calculation.
Check the demurrage calculation.
Save the nomination.
a) Create a nomination with reference to Freight contract document:

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Nomination→ Maintain
Choose Create.

Nomination No. FCnnnn-## (where nnnn ñ
current calendar year)

Transport System: MARINE DE
Nomination type CARR
Vehicle Number Marine-##

Choose Enter.
Enter the following item data:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 121



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Item 1: Schedule Item Type: O (Origin)
Location ID: SIDI KERIR
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Date: Today's date
Ref. doc. indicator: K (Purchase Contract)
Ref. document: Your purchase contract
Ref.Doc.Item Item number in your contract
FC RDI K (Purchase Contract)
FC-Opt. Ref Doc Your Freight contract
FC-Item Item number in your contract

Item 2: Schedule Item Type: D (Destination)
Location ID: TRIEST
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Date: Today's date + 1 day
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)

Choose the drag down for the pegging types and select Laytime ñ
Item Contract
Select first line and choose Peg Items
Select first line and choose from menu Goto→ Item→ Laytime
Calculation
The result of calculation should be 0, no actual time and date for
Laytime events captured yet.
Choose Continue.
Choose Save.

2. Change the nomination and put actual dates of Hose connected and Hose
disconnected events for the first item.

Continued on next page

122 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Vehicle Concept and Freight Contract

Event Actual St. Actual St. Actual End Actual End
Date-From Time-From Date To Time To

HOCO Today's 01:00:00 Today's 10:00:00
date date

HODI Today's 23:00:00 Today's 04:00:00
date date + 1 day

Check the demurrage calculation.
Save the nomination.
a) Change the nomination Laytime events

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Nomination→ Maintain
Double click on the first item and choose tab Events/Text.
On the left down corner scroll down to the HOCO and HODI events.
Enter the actual dates for Hose connected and Hose disconnected
events:

Event Actual St. Actual Actual End Actual End
Date-From St. Time- Date To Time To

From
HOCO Today's 01:00:00 Today's 10:00:00

date date + 1
day

HODI Today's 23:00:00 Today's 04:00:00
date + 1 date + 2
day days

Select first line and choose from menu Goto→ Item→ Laytime
Calculation
The result of calculation should be 1.708,00.
Choose Continue.
Choose Save.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 123



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain concept of Transport Unit and Vehicle
ï Understand the tasks and operations to be executed under Freight Contract
ï Explain Laytime and Demurrage Calculation

124 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management
Lesson Overview
This Lesson explains the stock projection process which is concerned with the
operational level monitoring and management of stock positions throughout
the supply chain. This includes stock at locations such as terminals and bulk
plants, refineries as well as in-transit. This includes updating current stock
positions with book or physical values; projecting stock positions forward into the
future; taking all inbound and outbound forecasts, schedules and movements into
account; consideration of tankage constraints; stock simulations; and nomination
triggering. During the stock projection process, you can calculate, change, and
simulate inventory forecasts using the Stock Projection Worksheet in Traderís
and Schedulerís Workbench (TSW).

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Explain the concept of Stock Projection Worksheet (SPW)
ï Operate with TSW document flow
ï Understand the purposes of Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI)

Business Example
VOILl DE operates with crude supply network planning, analyzes via Stock
Projection Worksheet situation with inventory positions on different locations
(Location = TRIEST) and calculates the inventory forecast for a date or time period
and for combinations of material, location, transport system, and valuation type

Bulk Operational Inventory Management
During the stock projection process, you can calculate, change, and simulate
inventory forecasts using the Stock Projection Worksheet in Traderís and
Schedulerís Workbench (TSW). The Stock Projection Worksheet calculates and
shows the inventory forecast for a date or time period and for combinations of
material, location, transport system, and valuation type.
A combination of system settings determines what data the Traderís and
Schedulerís Workbench (TSW) uses and in what way the data is used to generate
the Stock Projection Worksheet. Settings made for master data, inventory data,
and Customizing form the basis for generating the Stock Projection Worksheet.
The Stock Projection Worksheet shows the projected stock for the selected
combination of transport system and material or location and material
combinations. You can also designate a material and valuation type to include
the owner of the material in the Stock Projection Worksheet. You can carry out

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 125



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

ìwhat-ifî simulations of incoming and outgoing bulk shipments to see the effect
of these shipments on the projected inventory. You can also apply selected what-if
shipments to the schedule directly from the Stock Projection Worksheet. In the
Stock Projection Worksheet you can change forecasted rack issues and see the
changes to the projected inventory.
The Stock Projection Worksheet is divided into a selection or filter area on the
left and a results area on the right side of the screen.
Selection Area
The data you enter in the selection area for location, material, transport system,
and valuation type (owner) determine the Stock Projection Worksheet results that
the system displays in the tabstrip on the right. Also, you can select the subtract
heel and accumulate negative inventory functions in the selection area.

Figure 45: Stock Projection Worksheet (SPW)

Results Area
You can view the projected stock and the settings used to generate the Stock
Projection Worksheet on the following tabs:
Stock Projection
The Stock Projection tab displays the projected inventory for all the dates within
the rolling period including quantities for the base inventory, what-if simulation,
bulk receipts, bulk issues, and forecast figures for rack issues. The following
columns on the Stock Projection tab display the stock projection figures:

126 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

1. Period
The Date column always displays the date of each Stock Projection
Worksheet line and the Day column always shows the day of the week
for the date.

2. Inventory
2.1. What-If Simulation

The results of the what-if calculation are displayed in the Inv.What-If
column. You can enter what-if figures in the Stock Projection Worksheet to
simulate the effects on the inventory. The actual quantities are not changed
during what-if simulation.

2.2 Base Inventory
The Inventory column displays the most accurate inventory figures
available. The Stock Projection Worksheet calculates the base inventory
quantities using actual quantities when possible, but uses scheduled
quantities where actual quantities are missing or are incomplete. The base
inventory quantities are highlighted, if there is a corresponding TSW
Worklist item.

3. Bulk Goods Receipts and Goods Issues
3.1. Proposed Quantities

For bulk receipts, the REC-Proposed column shows the replenishment
proposal generated by the planning engine. These are the proposed
quantities to cover replenishment needs not covered by existing
nominations. You can open a dialog box from the bulk receipts item to see
the corresponding bulk issues item which is displayed at the same date line
minus the offset. For bulk issues, the figures in the ISS-Proposed column
are the same as the corresponding receipts proposal. The quantities are
highlighted, if there is a corresponding TSW Worklist item.

3.2. What-If Quantities
In the REC-What-If and the ISS-What-If columns you can manually enter
quantity figures, such as from nominations to simulate results from the
current day forward. The system also displays document quantities that
are not yet assigned to nominations. You must define this in Customizing
for simulated schedules. Here you select stock projection as the simulation
application and documents in stock projection as the schedule category.
You can save the what-if figures so that they are used as part of the stock
projection data that the system uses for subsequent scheduling.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 127



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

3.3. SAP Documents
For Bulk Receipts the unscheduled quantities from documents, such as
contracts, quoatations, purchase requests, and purchase orders are displayed
in the REC-Doc.Qty column. You define the use of SAP documents in stock
projection using various customizing and system settings for document
relevance. For Bulk Issues the unscheduled quantities from the sales order
are displayed in the ISS-Doc.Qty column. In both cases the quantities are
the difference between the document quantity and the scheduled quantity.
When all order items have been scheduled, no figure is displayed in this
column. You can view details about the assigned documents by selecting
the quantity figure in the REC-Doc.Qty column or ISS-Doc.Qty column.
A dialog box appears containing the document number, line item number,
item quantity, and unscheduled quantity. You can navigate to the document
by double-clicking on the document number in the dialog box.

3.4. Scheduled Quantity
The REC-Sched. and ISS-Sched. columns display the quantities scheduled
in a nomination on a particular date. The corresponding nomination
number is displayed in the REC-Nomination or ISS-Nomination column. If
there are multiple items scheduled in the nomination for the same date, the
quantities are added and the total quantity is displayed. You can view the
quantity of each item by selecting the nomination number and selecting
Nomination References on the toolbar. A dialog box appears showing each
item of the nomination. When multiple nominations are relevant to one
scheduled quantity, the word Multiple appears and you can navigate to the
individual batches. The quantities are highlighted, if there is a relevant
TSW Worklist item.

128 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

3.5. Nomination Number and Status
The REC-Nomination and ISS-Nomination columns show the identifier for
the nomination that corresponds to the Stock Projection Worksheet item.
The REC-Nom Status and ISS-Nom Status columns show the overall status
of the nomination. A nomination can be scheduled but not actualized,
partially actualized, or completely actualized. Actualized nominations
contain line items that have been confirmed through tickets.

3.6. Actual Quantity
The REC-Actuals and ISS-Actuals columns show the sum of all actualized
quantities (quantity from a nomination or nomination item for which a
ticket exists). The system ignores these quantities when the projected
inventory is calculated for the Stock Projection Worksheet. Actual
quantities are displayed for the current date or days in the past.

3.7. The REC-Ticket and ISS-Ticket columns show the sum of all ticket
quantities for a particular date (corresponds to the ticket end date). You can
view all the tickets that correspond to the quantity by double-clicking on
the ticket field.

Attributes
On the Attributes tab you can view the data used to generate the Stock Projection
Worksheet, such as the rolling period, days in past, Stock Projection Worksheet
unit of measure, conversion factor, book inventory, and relevant planning
parameters, as well as, the parameters used to calculate the forecast figures for
rack issues.
1. Starting Date: The starting date is the first day used when the system

generates the Stock Projection Worksheet.
2. Rolling Period: The Stock Projection Worksheet uses the days in past values

and rolling period values from the master data record of the transport system
or location. The Rolling Period is used to define the number of days for
which the Stock Projection Worksheet is displayed. In conjunction with the
days in past value, this defines the start and end date for the Stock Projection
Worksheet.

3. Stock Balancing: The stock balancing function is used to balance the
incoming and outgoing movements in terms of projected stock figures.

Physical Inventory
You can use physical inventory figures as the basis for stock projection. You can
view the physical inventory data by selecting the Physical Inv. tab in the Stock
Projection Worksheet. You can maintain physical inventory data for a location,
material, and valuation type.
Quality Calculation

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 129



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

The Quality calc. tab displays the results of the Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP)
calculation. When you select the Quality calc. tab, the system calculates the
average weighted RVP based on the bulk receipts and their RVP value. To include
RVP calculations in your stock projection, you must maintain RVP values in
nominations.
During the calculation for weighted RVP, the system multiplies the Stock
Projection Worksheet inventory by the RVP value before receipts, adds the
scheduled receipts multiplied by the RVP value in the nomination, and divides that
figure by the inventory plus the scheduled receipts.

Stock Projection Worksheet ñ Inventory Management
You can use the What-If functions of the Stock Projection Worksheet to simulate
different affects on the inventory. You can perform stock projection for the
following types of inventories.
Base inventory
The SAP book inventory is generally the basis for calculating the base inventory.
The system calculates the base inventory by taking into account all actual and
expected incoming and outgoing movements. However, in Customizing you can
define the physical inventory as the basis for calculating the base inventory. In
this case, the Stock Projection Worksheet uses the latest update of the physical
inventory as the starting inventory.
What-If inventory
The basis for calculating the what-if (simulated) inventory is either the physical
inventory or SAP book inventory. The calculation of the what-if inventory
considers all the actual and expected incoming and outgoing movements including
what-if figures entered in the Stock Projection Worksheet.

130 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Figure 46: Inventory Management

Physical Inventory
You can use the physical inventory as the basis for generating the Stock Projection
Worksheet. In this case, the system calculates the base inventory using the
physical inventory. Also, the what-if inventory for future days is based on the
latest update of the physical inventory. The starting inventory for a particular date
is initially calculated using the first inventory quantities received for that date, for
example the last reported gauge readings. In the Stock Projection Worksheet, the
base inventory column displays physical inventory and the column for the planned
inventory displays the what-if quantities.
You maintain physical inventory data for a locations, materials, and valuation
types. You can also maintain the physical inventory for a location and the tanks
assigned to a location.
In the master data records for locations and materials, you activate the stock
projection based on the physical inventory of the location and material.
You can view the physical inventory data that you entered for a location, tank,
material, and valuation type by selecting the Physical Inv. tab in the Stock
Projection Worksheet.
You can also perform a historical analysis of the physical inventory for alternate
materials to track, for example, the seasonal changeovers of materials.

TSW document flow ñ Ticket
Ticket

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 131



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

This object is an official notice sent by a partner, such as a carrier, that is sent by
fax or E-mail and contains information about the movement of product. Tickets
are entered in Traderís and Schedulerís Workbench (TSW) either automatically
by electronic interchange using the Intermediate Document (IDoc) format, or by
manually entering the ticket data in the system. If you receive incomplete tickets
as IDocs from the carrier, you have to process these manually.
The various TSW movement scenarios are triggered by the receipt of a movement
ticket from an external source, such as a pipeline carrier. TSW has a holding
structure for tickets and controls the subsequent processing when a ticket is
entered in the system.
You can define customer-specific functions using junction functions in
Customizing to control the processing of documents after a ticket is posted
(actualized). You can group these functions into function groups and assign the
applications relevant for processing.
Each TSW movement scenario has a corresponding junction function group to
control the document processing related to posted tickets.
Ticket Transaction
The ticket transaction allows you to:
ï Process multiple ticket items such as inspector reports, measurement

documents, tickets that can be posted, or tickets created by prorate
calculation.

ï Use the quantity conversion interface (QCI) from the Hydrocarbon Product
Management (HPM) component in ticket transactions. This allows you to
calculate the actual quantity for each ticket in multiple units of measure
(depending on the unit of measure group assigned to the material) and save
the quantities and corresponding conversion parameters in the new ticket
tables.

ï Issue a bill of lading, certificate of origin, or delivery tickets at item level
in nomination maintenance.

132 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Figure 47: SPW - Inventory Management

Figure 48: TSW document flow - Ticket

Ticket Types

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 133



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

You can define different ticket types. You use ticket types to start certain actions
in the system or prevent the system from performing these actions. When defining
a ticket type, you can assign processes, such as ticket actualization, prorate
calculation, or measurement comparison, and set permissions and enter default
values.
You can also include a base unit of measure, which allows the system to use a
uniform unit of measure during loading. As a result, the values issued by the
quantity conversion interface (QCI) are consistent (for example, L15, BB6) for all
physical measurement tickets.
Ticket Validation and Actualization
You can save the ticket directly without validating it.
To validate a ticket, choose Validate. The system checks the values in the ticket
against the nomination items, such as the scheduled quantity and actual quantity,
and against documents that have already been created. You define which checks
the system performs in Customizing. To actualize a ticket, choose Actualize. The
system checks the data in the ticket. If the check is completed without any error
messages, the system starts the routine for generating subsequent documents, such
as call-offs, goods issues, and goods receipts. The movement scenario to which
the nomination item is assigned determines which steps the system performs
during the actualization process. You make the movement scenario settings in
Customizing.
If ticket actualization is successful, the nomination is updated with the actual
posted quantity, the nomination status is changed, the relevant SAP documents are
generated, and the document flow is created. You can view the document flow on
the Display Ticket: Overview + Details screen by choosing the Doc. flow tab page
in the Item Details section of the screen.

Hydrocarbon Quantity Conversion
Oil and oil products are bulk products in liquid form that are processed and
shipped in large quantities. Even the smallest fluctuations in temperature can
result in considerable fluctuations in volume, and as a result, to significant
fluctuations in value.
Because the measured volume of an oil product is temperature-dependent, volume
correction and density correction are required, because the density of material is
defined as the relation between mass and volume.
For correcting volumes and density, in addition to the SAP Standard quantity
conversion, there is an oil quantity conversion. It allows volumes at ambient
temperature and densities at test temperature to be converted into densities,
volumes and masses at standard temperature. The oil quantity conversion is thus
used to convert the quantity of an oil product into various units of measure.

134 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

From a technical point of view, the oil quantity conversion uses external c-code
programs, which are accessed through an interface within the Quantity Conversion
Interface (QCI). The c-code programs are licensed to SAP customers by The
American Petroleum Institute (API).

Figure 49: Hydrocarbon Product Management

Prerequisites in general settings:
Definition of Units of Measure and Dimensions
The following units of measure are used for the oil quantity conversion:
ï Mass units of measure
ï Volume units of measure
ï Density units of measure
ï You can define the volume units of measurement for a specific temperature.
The L15 unit of measure is defined as ìliters at a temperature of 15 Celsiusî.
Density units of measure can be defined for a specific temperature. The following
density types are allowed for liquids:
ï API gravity (no dimension)
ï Relative density (no dimension)
ï Absolute density (SI unit: kg/m)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 135



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

If no density unit is specified, the system automatically uses the kg/m SI unit.
Density units of measure for API gravity and relative density are not necessary,
because those units are dimensionless as relations of density units. However,
dimensionless units of measure can be defined and used for documentation
purposes.
For liquid quantity calculation, pressure parameters can be sent to the Quantity
Conversion Interface. Those parameters can be used in customer-specific
functions.

Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI)
Prerequisites in Material Master:
Base unit of measure
You define a base unit of measure (stockkeeping unit) for the material in the
material master record. That is the unit of measure for the stock quantity (base
quantity) in the system. Because that base quantity also determines the valuation
of the material, it is very important to choose a standardized unit of measure as the
base unit of measure.
In addition, you can also save a relation between two units of measure in the
system as conversion factors. The conversion factors are used for all planning
calculations for a material, as long as the real quantities from goods movements
are not known. The unit of measure relation for each material is a sub-definition
of the unit of measurement definition. The unit of measurement definition is valid
globally for all the materials.
Unit of measure group
The unit of measure group is a group of units of measure that is assigned to a
material at plant level and that enables inventory management in multiple units of
measure for the material.
You can define unit of measure groups and their entries (units of measure) in
Customizing If stock has already posted for the material, it is not possible to
change the unit of measure group in the material master.

136 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Figure 50: Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI)

Assigning a Conversion Group
The Quantity Conversion Interface is activated for a material when a conversion
group is assigned to a material in the material master. The conversion group
also defines which specific external functions are used to calculate the material
quantities and base parameters (base density, base calorific value). The conversion
group contains a connection to external routines that are required for Oil and
Gas quantity conversion.
The conversion group is defined at plant level. In that way, the material is
classified for all plants as an HPM material, which means the conversion group
has to be maintained for all plants for the material. If stock has already been
posted for the material, it is not possible to change the conversion group in the
material master record.

Ticket Processing
IS-OIL-TSW: Ticket Purpose

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 137



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

The ticket purpose is a type of ticket. TSW offers 5 different ticket purposes:
1. Field ticket: This is the standard TSW ticket that shows the actualized

quantity.
2. Correction ticket: This ticket contains the new quantity that needs to replace

the old quantity; see the scenario descriptions for more details.
3. Final confirmation: This ticket contains the remaining quantity that is

delivered; this ticket is the final step to closing the nomination.
4. Internally-generated for posting: When set, the 'Internally Generated'

indicator shows that the ticket was not sent into the system by an IDoc or
based on a physical existing document; for example, book transfers.

5. Reversal Ticket: When you reverse a ticket, you do not change any
data. Instead, you are returning the ticket back to the status it had before
actualization. Depending on the movement scenario and the previously
posted documents, the system performs the following activities during
actualization of a reversed ticket:
Cancel inventory postings (goods issue, goods receipt, transfer posting)
Delete delivery note from the shipment
Delete items from the outbound delivery
Delete items from the purchase call-off

Figure 51: Ticket Processing

138 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Ticket Deletion
This function enables you to delete actualized tickets after you have saved them.
Prerequisites
You have created and saved a ticket.
You have not actualized the ticket.
Features
When you delete the ticket, the system marks the ticket as parked. When the
ticket has this status, you can no longer actualize it and therefore not trigger any
subsequent documents. If you want to continue to use the parked ticket, you can
recover it.
You cannot delete tickets that have been actualized, because the actualization
process generates SAP subsequent documents and it is not possible to delete
tickets for which a document flow exists.
Ticket Recovering
Prerequisite
You created a nomination and the system generated a ticket.
You deleted a ticket.
Features
The recovered tickets can be processed just as other tickets in TSW.
If you mistakenly recovered a ticket, you can delete the ticket again.

Crude Import Terminal
Crude Import Terminal in MM represented by conception of Stock Transfer from
Plant to Plant
A stock transfer from plant to plant generally takes place within a company code.
It can, however, also take place between two company codes, if the plants are
assigned to different valuation areas, which belong to different company codes.
Unlike a stock transfer from storage location to storage location, a stock transfer
from plant to plant affects both Materials Planning and Financial Accounting, as
follows:
Materials Planning
Materials Planning is affected because a change of plant stock is taken into
account by Materials Planning.
Financial accounting

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 139



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Accounting is affected if both plants are assigned to different valuation areas. This
means that a stock transfer leads not only to a quantity update but also to a value
update (stock value, G/L accounts). Thus, parallel to the material document for
stock transfer, an accounting document is created.
You can enter this stock transfer using either the one-step procedure or the two-step
procedure, whereby only the one-step procedure can be planned with a reservation.

Figure 52: Crude Import Terminal in MM

Crude Import Terminal in TSW represented by conception of Transfer Scenarios.
TSW movement scenarios determine the Document Processing that the system
carries out for scheduled bulk shipments. In addition to other factors, Document
Processing determines whether sales orders, purchase orders, stock transfer orders,
or other documents form the basis for a shipment. Document Processing also
determines how a nomination is processed, how subsequent documents are posted,
and the effect a ticket reversal has on the underlying documents.

140 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Figure 53: Crude Import Terminal in TSW

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 141



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

142 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Exercise 5: International Export/Import
Operations (raw material). Bulk
Operational Inventory Management
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Create nominations and tickets to purchase crude oil into a vessel and

discharge the vessel.
ï Use Nomination Maintenance, Ticketing and the Stock Projection Worksheet

to schedule and execute bulk movements
ï Display and explain the document flow
ï Display and explain the rules for volume/mass conversion

Business Example
You enable schedulers for marine movements of crude to schedule the movements
from the port location Sidi Kerir to Triest. You run a purchasing scenario through
this supply chain and verify the inventory situation on the Stock Projection
Worksheet.
You create nominations to fulfill all the requirements of this business scenario.
You process incoming tickets manually, check the updated inventory and the
document flow. Control stock on different unit of measurement.

Task 1:
Create a nomination to schedule the purchase for that sales contract from your
location (Sidi Kerir) by entering the following data:

Nomination No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## (where nnnn
ñ current calendar year)

Transport System: MARINE DE
Nomination Type: CARR
Vehicle ID: MARINE-##

1. Enter the following item data:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 143



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Schedule Item Type: O (Origin)
Ref. Doc. Indicator: K
Doc. Number: Enter your purchase contract

number (from exercise 3, task 2)

Make sure that the following data is defaulted for the first item:

Location ID: SIDI KERIR
Scheduled Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##

Enter the following item data:

Quantity: 500í000 (BB6)
Date: Today's date

Item 2: Schedule Item Type: D (Destination)
Location ID: TRIEST
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)
Date: Today's date + 5 days

Select items and set the Quick Confirmation indicator.
Save the nomination and make a note of its number:

Task 2:
The scheduler wants to view the Stock Projection Worksheet for the product
ARAB_HEAVY-## at locations SIDI KERIR, TRIEST and for transport system
MARINE DE. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location SIDI KERIR, TRIEST,

transport system MARINE DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________

3. Please compare results of Stock Projection Worksheet and standard report
Stock Overview.
Are the results identical?

Continued on next page

144 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

____________________________________________________
4. Change the nomination.

For the first item in the nomination enter the following item data:

Date: Today's date+2 days

Save the nomination.
What happened to the proposed stock level in the Stock Projection
Worksheet?
__________________________

Task 3:
You need to check the units of measurement group and conversion group for
material ARAB_HEAVY-## and defaults for volume/mass conversion in the
in-transit transport systemMARINE DE.
1. Display the material master for ARAB_HEAVY-## and note down units of

measurement group and conversion group.
Units of measurement group ____________________________
Conversion group____________________________

2. Display the defaults for material ARAB_HEAVY-## for transport system
MARINE DE
What is the test temperature ____________________________
What is the test API Gravity ____________________________

Task 4:

1. Create a ticket to capture preliminary figures for the goods receipt, by
entering the following data:

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket Type Carrier ticket
Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## LO (where

nnnn ñ current calendar year)

Enter the preliminary quantity as follows:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 145



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Net Quantity: 500í000 (BB6)
End Date: Today's date

Actualize the ticket.
2. You receive information that the originally posted quantity was incorrect.

Create a correction ticket to capture the actual data for the goods receipt by
entering the following data:

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## LO (where
nnnn ñ current calendar year)

Select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the actual quantity:

Net Quantity: 499í999 (BB6)

Actualize the ticket.
3. Check the document flow.

Display both tickets for FOB-ROT-##-1 and check the document flow.
Which documents have been created in the background? Make a note of the
document numbers.

Version 000 Version 001
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________

Check the quantities in the material documents. Which movement types
have been used?

Continued on next page

146 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________

4. You receive information a confirmation that vessel arrived at destination and
discharge crude into port terminal. Create a ticket to capture the actual data
for the goods receipt by entering the following data:

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## DS (where
nnnn ñ current calendar year)

Select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the actual quantity:

Net Quantity: 499í999 (BB6)

Actualize the ticket.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 147



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Solution 5: International Export/Import
Operations (raw material). Bulk
Operational Inventory Management
Task 1:
Create a nomination to schedule the purchase for that sales contract from your
location (Sidi Kerir) by entering the following data:

Nomination No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## (where nnnn
ñ current calendar year)

Transport System: MARINE DE
Nomination Type: CARR
Vehicle ID: MARINE-##

1. Enter the following item data:

Schedule Item Type: O (Origin)
Ref. Doc. Indicator: K
Doc. Number: Enter your purchase contract

number (from exercise 3, task 2)

Make sure that the following data is defaulted for the first item:

Location ID: SIDI KERIR
Scheduled Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##

Enter the following item data:

Quantity: 500í000 (BB6)
Date: Today's date

Item 2: Schedule Item Type: D (Destination)
Location ID: TRIEST
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)
Date: Today's date + 5 days

Select items and set the Quick Confirmation indicator.
Continued on next page

148 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Save the nomination and make a note of its number:
a) Create a nomination to schedule the purchase for that sales contract

from your location (Sidi Kerir) by entering the following data:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Nomination→ Create.
Enter the following data:

Nomination No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## (where
nnnn ñ current calendar year)

Transport System: MARINE DE
Nomination Type: CARR
Vehicle ID: MARINE-##

Enter the following data at item level:
Choose Enter.

Schedule Item Type: O (Origin)
Ref. Doc. Indicator: K
Doc. Number: Enter your purchase contract

number (from exercise 3, task
2)

Choose Enter.

Location ID: SIDI KERIR
Scheduled Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##

Enter the following item data:

Quantity: 500í000 (BB6)
Date: Today's date

Item 2: Schedule Item Type: D (Destination)
Location ID: TRIEST
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)
Date: Today's date + 5 days

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 149



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Select items and set the Quick Confirmation indicator.
Save the nomination.

Task 2:
The scheduler wants to view the Stock Projection Worksheet for the product
ARAB_HEAVY-## at locations SIDI KERIR, TRIEST and for transport system
MARINE DE. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.

a) Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet for location SIDI KERIR,
TRIEST:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ Generate SPW→ As dialog task

Location ID: SIDI KERIR, TRIEST
Transport System MARINE DE
Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Valuation Type UNTAX

Execute the report by choosing F8.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location SIDI KERIR, TRIEST,

transport system MARINE DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
a) Check the Stock Projection Worksheet

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ List

3. Please compare results of Stock Projection Worksheet and standard report
Stock Overview.
Are the results identical?

Continued on next page

150 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

____________________________________________________
a) Check the standard report Stock Overview.

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock Overview
On the selection screen please enter:

Material ARAB_HEAVY-##
Plant 1180 MARINE DE

4. Change the nomination.
For the first item in the nomination enter the following item data:

Date: Today's date+2 days

Save the nomination.
What happened to the proposed stock level in the Stock Projection
Worksheet?
__________________________
a) Change the dates in the nomination.

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Nomination→ Maintain.
For the first item in the nomination enter the following item data:

Date: Today's date+2 days

Save the nomination.
The goods receipt will be done 2 days later, meaning that starting
inventory in the transport system MARINE DE moved 2 days ahead.

Task 3:
You need to check the units of measurement group and conversion group for
material ARAB_HEAVY-## and defaults for volume/mass conversion in the
in-transit transport systemMARINE DE.
1. Display the material master for ARAB_HEAVY-## and note down units of

measurement group and conversion group.
Units of measurement group ____________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 151



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Conversion group____________________________
a) Display the material master for ARAB_HEAVY-## and note down

units of measurement group and conversion group.
Logistics→Materials Management→Material Master→Material
→ Display→ Display Current
Enter material ARAB_HEAVY-## and press Enter
Select only Oil-specific data tab
Press Enter
Enter Plant 1180
Press Enter
Units of measurement group DC GENERAL METRIC & US (USE
FOR DT CALC.)
Conversion group 56A 5 & 6A 60 F CRUDEOIL IN API GRAVITY

2. Display the defaults for material ARAB_HEAVY-## for transport system
MARINE DE
What is the test temperature ____________________________
What is the test API Gravity ____________________________
a) Display the defaults for material ARAB_HEAVY-## for transport

system MARINE DE.
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management
→ Environment → Oil qty. conversion → QCI (Quantity
Conversion Interface) parameter defaults: Oil&Gas materials→
Create/Display/Delete/Activate default parameters
Enter material ARAB_HEAVY-##
Enter Plant 1180
Press Enter.
Choose the item.
The test temperature is 60,00 FAH
The test API Gravity is 25,00000 API

Task 4:

1. Create a ticket to capture preliminary figures for the goods receipt, by
entering the following data:

Continued on next page

152 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket Type Carrier ticket
Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## LO (where

nnnn ñ current calendar year)

Enter the preliminary quantity as follows:

Net Quantity: 500í000 (BB6)
End Date: Today's date

Actualize the ticket.
a) Create a ticket to capture preliminary figures for the goods receipts.

To do this, choose:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Ticket→ Create.

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## LO
(where nnnn ñ current calendar
year)

Choose Enter.
Select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the preliminary quantity.
To do this, select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the following data:

Net Quantity: 500í000
UoM: BB6
End Date: Today's date

Choose Actualize.
2. You receive information that the originally posted quantity was incorrect.

Create a correction ticket to capture the actual data for the goods receipt by
entering the following data:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 153



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## LO (where
nnnn ñ current calendar year)

Select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the actual quantity:

Net Quantity: 499í999 (BB6)

Actualize the ticket.
a) Create a correction ticket to capture the actual data for the goods issue.

To do this, choose:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Ticket→ Correct.
Enter the following data:

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## LO
(where nnnn ñ current calendar
year)

Choose Enter.
Select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the actual quantity:

Net Quantity: 499í999
UoM: BB6

Choose Actualize.
3. Check the document flow.

Display both tickets for FOB-ROT-##-1 and check the document flow.
Which documents have been created in the background? Make a note of the
document numbers.

Version 000 Version 001
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________

Continued on next page

154 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________

Check the quantities in the material documents. Which movement types
have been used?

____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________

a) Check the document flow by choosing:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Ticket→ Display.

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## LO
(where nnnn ñ current calendar
year)

Make sure that the Ticket Version and Location ID fields are empty.
Choose Enter.
Select the first line item and choose Enter.
Choose the Document Flow tab.
The documents that are created are: purchase order, shipping
notification, TD shipment, load confirmation.
Double-click the material document (goods receipt) and choose
Display.
Check that the following data is displayed:

Quantity: 500í000 BB6
Movement type: 101, Goods Receipt

Repeat the above process for the second ticket version and choose
the Document Flow tab.
Documents created: Load confirmation, purchase order, load
confirmation

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 155



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Double-click the first material document (goods receipt reversal) and
choose check that the following data is displayed:

Quantity: 500í000 BB6
Movement type: 102, reverse goods receipt

Return to the previous screen.
Double-click the second material document (goods receipt) and check
that the following data is displayed:

Quantity: 499í999 BB6
Movement type: 101, goods receipt

4. You receive information a confirmation that vessel arrived at destination and
discharge crude into port terminal. Create a ticket to capture the actual data
for the goods receipt by entering the following data:

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## DS (where
nnnn ñ current calendar year)

Select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the actual quantity:

Net Quantity: 499í999 (BB6)

Continued on next page

156 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Operational Inventory Management

Actualize the ticket.
a) Create a ticket to capture the actual data for the goods receipt at

destination. To do this, choose:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Ticket→ Create.

Nomination No.: Enter number from exercise 3,
task 1

Ticket No.: SK nnnn MARINE-## DS
(where nnnn ñ current calendar
year)

Choose Enter.
Select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the preliminary quantity.
To do this, select the line item and choose Enter.
Enter the following data:

Net Quantity: 499í999
UoM: BB6
End Date: Today's date

Choose Actualize.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 157



Unit 3: International Export/Import Operations IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain the concept of Stock Projection Worksheet (SPW)
ï Operate with TSW document flow
ï Understand the purposes of Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI)

158 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Unit Summary

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Understand Tradeŕs and Scheduleŕs interaction
ï Explain typical business process in International Export/Import Operations

(Marine scenario)
ï Supply contracts
ï General understanding of Bulk Scheduling Management (TSW ñ Trader's

and Scheduler's Workbench)
ï Nomination processing and document flow when Bulk Marine Voyage

Scheduling
ï Explain concept of Transport Unit and Vehicle
ï Understand the tasks and operations to be executed under Freight Contract
ï Explain Laytime and Demurrage Calculation
ï Explain the concept of Stock Projection Worksheet (SPW)
ï Operate with TSW document flow
ï Understand the purposes of Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 159



Unit Summary IOG100

160 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 4
Bulk Supply Chain Management

(Inbound Distribution)

Unit Overview
VOIL Germany (Virtual Oil Company) buys most raw materials from the groups
trading company VOIL Int Trading, i.e. they are not active in the markets. The
receiving terminal is Triest. The terminal Triest is feeding a crude pipeline
to Austria and Germany with multiple receiving refineries, i.e. Triest and the
pipeline is a joined venture of all connected shippers run by an independent
entity (3rd party operator). For VOIL Germany the receiving installation is the
refinery at Ingolstadt.
Based upon the refinery run plans each shipper sets up a batch program to call
off the raw materials from stock in Triest. The carrier (joined venture pipeline
and terminal operator) works all shipper requests into an overall batch program
considering the required grades, volumes and arrival ranges in the refineries.
Once the batches arrive in the refineries, they are again stored in the refinery
tank farm before the finally are pumped to the atmospheric distillation units for
conversion into intermediate products.

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Use the functions in the system to carry out various business processes and
describe the subcomponents of these processes

ï Explain TSW master data
ï Schedule and execute movements using Nominations, Tickets, Stock

Projection Worksheet (SPW) and Location Balancing.
ï Describe the various system capabilities, such as pipeline shipments

Unit Contents
Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution ... . . . . . . . . .162

Exercise 6: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution)
.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .199

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 161



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement
Execution
Lesson Overview
Planning, scheduling, and executing the distribution of crude oil and refined
products plays a major role in your company for inbound movements (purchasing),
outbound movements (sales and delivery), and internal transfers (stock
replenishments). You use pipeline means of transport.
You schedule and execute shipments using TSW functions to manage and track
the various goods movements.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Use the functions in the system to carry out various business processes and

describe the subcomponents of these processes
ï Explain TSW master data
ï Schedule and execute movements using Nominations, Tickets, Stock

Projection Worksheet (SPW) and Location Balancing.
ï Describe the various system capabilities, such as pipeline shipments

Business Example
Planning, scheduling, and executing the distribution of crude oil and refined
products plays a major role in your company for inbound movements (purchasing),
outbound movements (sales and delivery), and internal transfers (stock
replenishments). You use pipeline means of transport.
You schedule and execute shipments using TSW functions to manage and track
the various goods movements.
VOil Germany stores crude discharged for the refinery in a joined venture terminal
in Triest. From there the crude is pumped in batches to the refinery Ingolstadt
through a pipeline. The batch size is determined by the receiving tank in the
refinery. The volume received in the refinery is measured by meter and sometimes
by tank dips. The volume difference dispatched at Triest versus received in
Ingolstadt is kept as in transit stock in the pipeline and cleared regularly by the
operator. Pipeline gain/loss is shared between all shippers.
Terminal and Pipeline are operated by 3rd party company TAL.
The crude pipeline in TSW is also a transport system with assigned locations
Triest (origin) and Refinery Ingolstadt (destination).

162 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Bulk Schedule Management
A scheduler in an oil company can optimize daily scheduling activities by using
the extended planning functions to schedule shipments of petroleum products.

Figure 54: Bulk Schedule Management

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 163



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

The planning and nomination processes enable the scheduler to schedule goods
movements and meet demand with a minimum of manual entries and the necessary
visual information to make correct decisions. The following sequence describes a
possible scheduling scenario:
ï You create long-term or spot contracts
ï You generate the SPW to populate the SPW with data (from nominations,

contracts, orders, and tickets).
ï You perform planning by generating replenishment proposals based on the

demand information from the SPW.
ï You generate the Worklist.
ï You create a nomination and assign contracts or orders to nomination line

items.
ï You send the nomination to different partners (such as carrier).
ï You confirm or reject nomination line items, based on information from

the partners.
ï You enter the ticket details based on the carrier ticket and physical goods

movements. You validate the ticket against the nomination line items.
ï The system automatically creates the underlying shipment documents and

postings against the nomination.

TSW Master Data Overview
TSW allows you to model the supply chain of an oil company, including pipeline
systems, marine routes, customers, vendors, and plants.

164 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Figure 55: TSW Master Data Overview

ï Transport systems are TSW master data objects that represent stock holding
objects to which you can assign locations. They represent pipelines or
marine routes as they exist in the real world.

ï Locations are nodes along a transport system. You define the business
purpose behind a location by assigning partners to them.

ï Using the partner role concept, you can assign certain functions to the
different TSW objects. A location is either a plant, a customer location, or a
vendor location in the real world.

ï You can also define planning locations, which represent a collection of a
number of real locations, for example a region. This aids scheduling at
earlier stages when schedules need to be generated but specific locations
or partners are not yet definite. Note that planning locations may overlap,
that is, a real location may be included in multiple planning locations, thus
providing optimum flexibility when creating planning views.

TSW Transport System
A transport system is a single, in-transit stock-holding object used for inventory
management purposes. Depending on individual requirements for modeling a
supply chain, the transport system can represent a fixed supply route, a supply
region, or a mode of transport. Examples of transport systems are a pipeline
system or a marine route.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 165



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

A transport system links locations and therefore it is recommended that you
assign two or more locations to a transport system. During scheduling, you assign
transport systems to nominations.

Figure 56: TSW Transport System

ï One of the functions of a transport system is to link the locations in the
supply chain. A transport system should always have two or more assigned
locations. During scheduling, you must assign a transport system to a
nomination. A location can either be an origin for the transport system
(supplies product into the transport system), or the location can be a
destination for the transport system (receives product from the transport
system). You can also define a location as both an origin and a destination.
As a result, the supply network is defined in terms of injection and discharge
points for each transport system.

ï TSW also provides a special type of transport system to model book
transfers. This transport system imposes different "rules" on the nomination
and subsequent document generation. For example, if you select the shipping
type book transfer for the transport system, the transport system does not
require an in-transit plant or in-transit storage location. Because there are no
physical goods movements for book transfers, the nomination shows that
there was a purchase of material, the sale of the same material with the same
quantity, both at the same location on the same scheduled date.

166 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

TSW Transport System: Details Screen

Figure 57: TSW Transport System: Details Screen

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 167



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

TSW Transport System: Details Screen Defaults

Figure 58: TSW Transport System: Details Screen Defaults

168 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Assigning Locations to Transport Systems

Figure 59: Assigning Locations to Transport Systems

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 169



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Assigning Materials to Transport Systems

Figure 60: Assigning Materials to Transport Systems

170 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Transport System/Location/Partner Assignment

Figure 61: Transport System/Location/Partner Assignment

ï You can create Partner Assignments from the Transport System transaction

TSW Location
A location is a fixed point on the supply chain where goods are handled (such as
plants, warehouses, supply sources, and markets).

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 171



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Figure 62: TSW Location

ï A TSW location represents a point on the supply chain model where loading
or discharge events take place and where business partners or stock holding
objects exist.

ï Locations are defined in master data records and are assigned to transport
systems as an origin, destination, or both. One location may be assigned
to many transport systems.

172 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

TSW Location: Details Screen

Figure 63: TSW Location: Details Screen

Assignment of Materials to Locations
You can assign materials to locations in the location master data record. Each
material assigned to a location can be processed with SPW, when you generate
SPW for combination of material and location.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 173



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Figure 64: Assignment of Materials to Locations

ï To assign materials to a location, you must first create a partner role that is
defined as a plant or storage location, and assign a location to this partner
role. The material that you assign to the location must be one that has already
been assigned to the plant or storage location.

ï In the location master data record you maintain all details about the material
that are relevant to the SPW and planning engine. These details includes:
units, cycle duration, and calendars. The supply source data determines the
position of the location in the supply chain.

174 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

TSW Master Data: Partner Role

Figure 65: TSW Master Data: Partner Role

ï You define TSW partner roles in the master data record used to define
business partners. The partner role includes information about the activities
that the business partner can perform and where the business partner
performs these activities. You can also define stockholding objects, such as
plants and storage locations as partner roles.

ï You define partner roles based on existing SAP System master data records,
such as a vendor, customer, or plant. Because the partner role defines the
activities that a business partner performs in the TSW supply chain, you
must assign transport systems or locations to the master data record of each
partner role.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 175



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

TSW Partner Roles

Figure 66: TSW Partner Roles

176 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Maintaining Partner Role Assignments

Figure 67: Maintaining Partner Role Assignments

Bulk Pipeline Scheduling
To fulfil requirements of Ingolstadt Refinery, a batch of crude oil must be shipped
from the Terminal on Tries along the Pipeline operated by 3rd party company
TAL (Transalpine pipeline).

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 177



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Figure 68: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling

Nominations

ï The Nomination is the central planning application in TSW to schedule,
group and communicate bulk movements and transportation within a Supply
Network. You use nominations to:
ñ Capture movement schedules based on demand and supply data, such

as from sales, purchase, or transfer documents
ñ Navigate to and validate against master data, such as the transport

systems, locations, partners, or vehicles
ñ Handle status (confirmation process)
ñ Navigate to the TSW Worklist and update the SPW
ñ Automatically generate subsequent documents, such as deliveries, bulk

shipments, goods movements, or billing documents
ñ Show document flow
ñ Integrate with SAP inventory management

178 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Nomination Communication Overview

Figure 69: Nomination Communication Overview

TSW Transaction: Nomination Maintenance

Figure 70: TSW Transaction: Nomination Maintenance

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 179



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

The TSW nomination maintenance transaction (O4NM) has the following
enhancements:
ï Quick confirm function
ï Valuation types are displayed or maintainable, depending on the material

and plant settings
ï Demand material and scheduled material are on item level
ï More columns are shown for line item data
ï Event text indicator to show if TSW events are maintained
ï Nomination item number in the first column
ï Customer field pop-ups for the header and item level
ï Status in the column on item level

Nomination Header: Available Tabs

Figure 71: Nomination Header: Available Tabs

180 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Nomination Item: Detail Tabs

Figure 72: Nomination Item: Detail Tabs

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 181



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Pipeline Scenario: Stock transfer

Figure 73: Pipeline Scenario: Stock transfer

ï The first line item of the nomination reflects a movement from the origin
location Triest (Terminal) into the pipeline.

ï The second line item represents a movement out of the pipeline into
destination location Ingolstadt.

ï The first movement increases the in-transit stock. The posting of a ticket
with the actual delivered quantity results stock transfer movement out of
pipeline into refinery tank, which decreases the in-transit stock and increases
stock in the refinery.

ï In this scenario, the system generates the following SAP system documents
when the ticket is actualized:

ï Loading:
ñ Reservation, TD Bulk Shipment, Load Confirmation

ï Discharge:
ñ Reservation, TD Bulk Shipment, Shipment Delivery Confirmation

182 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Pipeline Scenario: Document Flow

Figure 74: Pipeline Scenario: Document Flow

ï You can reference sales or purchase documents in nominations.
ï The sales or purchase documents must be TSW-relevant (manual or

automatic).
ï The system creates the corresponding call-offs, when the ticket is posted

which triggers the document generation process.
ï In conjunction with the TSW trading interface, these movement scenarios

simplify the deal scheduling processes.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 183



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Pipeline Business Functions: Pipeline Batching

Figure 75: Pipeline Business Functions: Pipeline Batching

ï Pipeline batching is a function available in Nomination Maintenance
and provides a view of the pipeline business from the pipeline operating
standpoint.

ï It provides several checks and validations, including the following:
ñ Route check
ñ Pipeline batch overlap check
ñ Batch material sequence check

184 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Pipeline Batch Handling

Figure 76: Pipeline Batch Handling

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 185



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Bulk Operational Inventory Management

ï The Stock Projection Worksheet calculates and shows the inventory forecast
for a date or time period and for combinations of material, location, transport
system, batch, and valuation type. You can use the What-If functions of the
Stock Projection Worksheet to simulate different effects on the inventory.
ñ The SPW calculates the projected inventory
ñ Real-time SPW update based on nominations, orders, and TSW tickets
ñ SPW calculation takes into account

ï Starting book inventory from SAP inventory management
ï Optional use of alternative inventory figures, such as physical count
ï Scheduled items from nominations
ï SAP system documents relevant for scheduling, such as sales orders
ï Demand forecasts for rack movements using Logistics Information
System (LIS) structure
ï Uses production versions to handle seasonal grade changeovers
ï Actual postings made in the SAP system that are relevant to TSW
ï Production plan figures using LIS structure

ñ Interactive SPW with details of movements
ñ Navigation to nomination and TSW Worklist

ï The Real-Time SPW function updates the SPW based on nominations,
orders and TSW tickets.

ï You set up LIS structures to stage the data into the SPW, which also has its
own data table to store manually entered figures.

ï The SPW uses a calculation logic that ensures that the calculations are made
correctly. For example, sales orders attached to nomination line items are
consumed by the line item and not double counted.

ï In general, the more firm the data, the more likely it will override a related
figure on the SPW. That is, actual quantities take precedence over scheduled
quantities, and scheduled quantities take precedence over document
quantities.

ï Planning proposals add to whatever figure is used for the day on which the
planning proposal occurs.

ï In the SPW, you can navigate to detailed information behind certain figures.
For example, you can click on the word multiple in the batch column to
expand the line to show all the batches scheduled on a specific day.

186 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Pipeline Scenario: Stock Projection Worksheet
The SPW is the central tool for daily scheduling activities.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 187



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Figure 77: Pipeline Scenario: Stock Projection Worksheet

ï The SPW provides a projection of the inventory (physical or book) over
a specified period of time for a given location-material combination on a
definable breakdown (daily, weekly, monthly).

ï You can generate stock projection data to be as detailed as the tank-level
(integration with IS-OIL: Tank/Silo-management).

ï Real time update of SPW.
ï Status concept: You can define the influence of product movements on the

inventory.
ï You can configure the system to display TSW-relevant documents, such

as orders and contracts, already scheduled volumes and their status
(nominations), production figures, real and forecasted throughput, ticketed
volumes, and corrected volumes.

ï Through the integration of TSW with SAP Advanced Planner and Optimizer
(SAP APO), you can set up the system to transfer APO demand planning
data to TSW.

ï The SPW allows an interactive simulation of movements (what-if scenarios)
and the creation of nominations based on those simulations.

ï Flexible layout concept: You can define additional columns and tabs.
ï You can enhance the calculation logic of the SPW using Business Add-Ins

(BAdIs) provided in TSW Customizing.

188 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Pipeline Scenario: SPW Calculation Logic
The calculation logic that the system uses to generate the SPW is very complex.
You can enhance the calculation logic with customer-specific routines using
BAdIs available in TSW Customizing.

Figure 78: Pipeline Scenario: SPW Calculation Logic

ï The following example demonstrates the standard SPW logic for calculating
the inventory for the current day:
ñ Day-end inventory of current day = Starting inventory + open receipts

schedules for the past ñ open issues scheduled for the future + receipts
for current day ñ issues for current day.

ï Explanations:
ñ Day-end-logic compared with Starting-day logic:

ï End-day: Current day movements determine current day inventory.
ï Startng-day: Current day movements determine next day inventory.

ñ Receipts: Production + SAP system documents + scheduled receipts
(nominations)

ñ Issues: Rack Issues + SAP system documents + scheduled receipts
(nominations)

ñ Rack Issues: Forecasted or actual rack-issues or corrected rack-issues.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 189



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Pipeline Scenario: SPW User Interaction and Layout

Figure 79: Pipeline Scenario: SPW User Interaction and Layout

ï Selection area provided to specify the location, transport system, material,
batch and tank in the SPW

ï Various tabs available, such as stock projection, attributes, physical
inventory, and tank data.

ï You can Customize and enhance the tabstrip.
ï You can access the reference documents directly from the SPW.
ï You can display the figures using a flexible graphics tool.
ï You can download the data to spreadsheets.
ï You can perform what-if simulation to plan for additional movements.
ï Flexible column layout (show, hide, and swap columns).
ï Integrated list functions (sorting and summing up).
ï Rack issues (current data or what-if forecasts) are filled by a user exit.

190 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Pipeline Scenario: Direct Access from SPW

Figure 80: Pipeline Scenario: Direct Access from SPW

ï The integration of the SPW with other components of TSW and the SAP
System allows direct access to:
ñ Nomination
ñ Worklist and worklist update
ñ SAP system documents
ñ Tickets
ñ Master data constraints, such as location data and tank data on the

SPW tabs
ñ You can define additional tabs to store additional information

Pipeline Scenario: Simulations in SPW: What-if
Using the simulation capabilities of the SPW you can create and save different
simulations in a clipboard.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 191



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Figure 81: Pipeline Scenario: Simulations in SPW: What-if

ï You can publish the simulations, whereby the system creates ìrealî
nominations. You can also use the simulations to change existing
nominations, such as the volume.

ï You use the What-If Pop-up to create simulations, which the system applies
to the What-If column of the SPW.

ï You use the What-If Clipboard to collect the simulations you create using
the What-If Pop-up. The What-If Clipboard collects the simulations across
different SPWs, such as SPWs for different locations.

ï The What-If Clipboard is user specific. When you publish the simulated
schedules to nominations, the data becomes available for all users of the
SPW.

ï The What-If Clipboard has full Advanced List View (ALV) capabilities and
is therefore adaptable to user requirements.

192 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Pipeline Scenario: Balancing Locations in the SPW

Figure 82: Pipeline Scenario: Balancing Locations in the SPW

ï The basic concept for stock balancing in SPW is intended to support a
variety of requirements, such as:

ï Overall balancing of product receipts and product issues in terms of projected
stock figures.

ï Consumption of purchase or sale quantities by outbound or inbound
scheduled quantities.

ï If the balancing function is activated (configurable), the system creates a
balance line in the SPW in the following cases:

ï When a sale or purchase takes place at a location, but only influences the
in-transit inventory and not the location inventory (customer or vendor
locations)

ï Sales out of pipe and out of own batch
ï Purchase into pipe and into own batch

Pipeline Scenario: Location Balancing
Location Balancing is a transaction in TSW to handle the balancing of demands
and supplies at locations within the location hierarchy over a period of time

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 193



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Figure 83: Pipeline Scenario: Location Balancing

ï Location Balancing was initially conceived for crude pipeline operations, but
is applicable to other types of periodic balancing, such as gas systems

ï You can configure the SAP system to take the following documents into
account for the demand and supply calculation:
ñ Nominations
ñ Sales (purchase) contracts and sales (purchase) orders
ñ Inventory adjustment requirements
ñ Plant-to-plant transfers

ï The location balancing screen provides an overview of the supplies and
demands, as well as a summary in the header area.

ï Inventory adjustment:
ñ You can reconcile imbalances by creating Inventory Adjustment

Requisitions (IAR), either manually or using automatic routines
ñ You can set up the system to automatically generate transfers in or

out of the inventory (can also generate manually). You can manually
change existing schedules to balance the inventory.

194 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Pipeline Business: Location Balancing Interaction

Figure 84: Pipeline Business: Location Balancing Interaction

ï Location balancing allows manual opening inventory adjustments and route
assignments

ï You can make adjustments to single demand and supply items or for groups
of supplies and demands

ï You can set up automatic inventory adjustments (transfer all rule) to maintain
location balances.

ï The location balancing screen allows for flexible querying and navigation
ï Manual entry of inventory adjustment requisitions
ï From the location balancing screen, you can view contract details, including

the contract schedule.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 195



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Bulk Movement Execution

ï A ticket is an official notice sent by a partner, containing information about a
product movement.
ñ In the ticket generation process, data is entered in the system either

manually or through an automatic interface:
ï Meter or gauge readings (opening, closing, or actual quantities)
ï Quantities or inspection reports provided by external systems or
partners

ñ The system stores the data in a load ticket table and uses the data during
the actualization process

ñ Actualization
ï The system creates the required transfer documents, such as call-offs,
delivery notes, and invoices with actual figures
ï The system updates the book inventory

ñ Reversal and Correction
ï Tickets can be cancelled and corrected including the subsequent
postings in one go.

Functions in Ticketing

Figure 85: Functions in Ticketing

196 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Ticket Reversal

Figure 86: Ticket Reversal

Figure 87: Ticket Reversal Screen

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 197



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Ticket Corrections

ï Correcting a ticket creates a new version of the original ticket containing the
changed data. When correcting a ticket you can:
ñ Correct the quantity after the ticket has been actualized
ñ Correct the loading date and time
ñ Correct the ticket posting data
ñ Delete purchase call-offs if the ticket quantity is zero
ñ Delete sales call-offs if the ticket quantity is zero
ñ Delete outbound delivery items

Figure 88: Ticket Corrections Screen

198 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Exercise 6: Bulk Supply Chain
Management (Inbound Distribution)
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Create the necessary master data to schedule supply chain activities and

assign materials to the transport system and locations
ï Create nominations and tickets to transport crude oil from port Triest to

the Ingolstadt refinery.
ï Use Nomination Maintenance, Ticketing and the Stock Projection Worksheet

to schedule and execute bulk movements
ï Display and explain the document flow

Business Example
You enable schedulers for pipeline movements of crude to schedule the movements
from the port location Triest to Ingolstadt. To check your system configuration,
you simulate a transportation process through this supply chain and verify the
inventory situation on the Stock Projection Worksheet. You create nominations to
fulfill all the requirements of this business scenario. You process incoming tickets
manually, check the updated inventory and the document flow.

Task 1:
You schedule a pipeline movement of crude oil from the port to the refinery. You
change a TSW Transport System and the other master data necessary for a pipeline
transport scenario. You assign the material to the transport system and locations.
1. Change the TSW Transport System PIPE CR DE and assign the material

ARAB_HEAVY-##
Enter the following details for the material:

SPW UoM: M15
Rolling Period: 110 (days)
Conversion factor: 1

Days in past: 100 (days)
Plan type: NPL (no planning)

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 199



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

2. Assign the material ARAB_HEAVY-## to the TSW locations TRIEST
and REF DE ING.
Enter the following data:

Inventory UoM: M15
Max Inventory: 6.289.804,482 M15
Rolling Period: 110 (days)

Conversion factor: 1
Days in past: 100 (days)

For the TSW Location REF DE ING please assign the material
ARAB_HEAVY-## to the tank T105:

Stock type 1 - Warehouse
Start date 01.01.2007

Task 2:
The pipeline scheduler wants to view the Stock Projection Worksheet for the
product ARAB_HEAVY-## at locations TRIEST, REF DE ING and for
transport system PIPE CR DE. He also needs to display the stock projection in a
weekly and monthly view. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________

Task 3:
Schedule a movement of material from the port location into the in-transit
transport system.
1. Create a nomination and test the copy item function, by copying the first

line item after creating the line item.

Continued on next page

200 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-## (where nnnn ñ current calendar
year)

Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Nomination type: CARR

2. Enter the following item data:

Item 1: Schedule Item O (Origin)
Type:

Location ID: TRIEST
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Date: Today's date
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)

Select the Quick Confirmation indicator, and copy and paste the line item.
Change the following data:

Item 2: Schedule Item D (Destination)
Type:

Location ID: REF DE ING
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)
Date: Today's date + 5 days

Select Quick Confirmation.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 201



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Task 4:
Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________

Task 5:
Execute the shipment by creating the tickets for loading.
1. Create and actualize a ticket for the loaded quantity:

Ticket No.: TALPnnnn-##-LO (where nnnn ñ current
calendar year)

Ticket Type: Carrier Ticket
Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-##

Change the nominated quantity to 29999 M15.
Display the ticket and take a note of the documents that the system created.
____________________________________________________

Task 6:
Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________

Task 7:
Execute the shipment by creating the tickets for discharging.
1. Create a ticket for the discharged quantity

Continued on next page

202 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Ticket Type: Carrier Ticket

Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-##

Change the nominated quantity to 29998 M15
Display the ticket and take a note of the documents that the system created.
___________________________________________________

Task 8:
Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location b, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 203



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Solution 6: Bulk Supply Chain
Management (Inbound Distribution)
Task 1:
You schedule a pipeline movement of crude oil from the port to the refinery. You
change a TSW Transport System and the other master data necessary for a pipeline
transport scenario. You assign the material to the transport system and locations.
1. Change the TSW Transport System PIPE CR DE and assign the material

ARAB_HEAVY-##
Enter the following details for the material:

Continued on next page

204 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

SPW UoM: M15
Rolling Period: 110 (days)
Conversion factor: 1

Days in past: 100 (days)
Plan type: NPL (no planning)

a) Change the TSW Transport System:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Master
Data→ Transport System→ Change
Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Choose Enter.
Press icon TS/Materials and assign the following material:
Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Select the material Press icon Details and enter the following details
for the material:

SPW UoM: M15
Rolling Period: 110 (days)
Conversion factor: 1

Days in past: 100 (days)
Plan type: NPL (no planning)

Choose Back and Save
2. Assign the material ARAB_HEAVY-## to the TSW locations TRIEST

and REF DE ING.
Enter the following data:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 205



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Inventory UoM: M15
Max Inventory: 6.289.804,482 M15
Rolling Period: 110 (days)

Conversion factor: 1
Days in past: 100 (days)

For the TSW Location REF DE ING please assign the material
ARAB_HEAVY-## to the tank T105:

Stock type 1 - Warehouse
Start date 01.01.2007

a) Assign the material to the TSW locations:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Master
Data→ Node Location→ Change

Location ID: TRIEST

Choose Enter.
Select the Materials tab.

Location ID: ARAB_HEAVY-##

Mark the item line and choose Details

Inventory UoM: M15
Max Inventory 6.289.804,482 M15

Select the SPW related tab.
Enter data:

Rolling Period: 110 (days)
Conversion factor: 1
Days in past: 100 (days)

Choose Back and Save.
Continued on next page

206 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Repeat this for the Location REF DE ING
And for the TSW Location REF DE ING assign the material
ARAB_HEAVY-## to the tank T105:
Select tab SOC in the location master data
Select line with T105 tank and choose Time dependent Assignments
Choose Assign material
Enter:

Stock type 1 - Warehouse
Start date 01.01.2007

Choose Back and Save.

Task 2:
The pipeline scheduler wants to view the Stock Projection Worksheet for the
product ARAB_HEAVY-## at locations TRIEST, REF DE ING and for
transport system PIPE CR DE. He also needs to display the stock projection in a
weekly and monthly view. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.

a) Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST and
REF DE ING:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ Generate SPW→ As dialog task

Location ID: TRIEST, REF DE ING
Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Valuation Type UNTAX

Execute the report by choosing F8.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 207



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

____________________________________________________
a) Check the Stock Projection Worksheet

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ List

Task 3:
Schedule a movement of material from the port location into the in-transit
transport system.
1. Create a nomination and test the copy item function, by copying the first

line item after creating the line item.

Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-## (where nnnn ñ current calendar
year)

Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Nomination type: CARR

a) Create a nomination:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Nomination→ Maintain
Choose Create.

Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-## (where nnnn ñ current
calendar year)

Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Nomination type: CARR

Choose Enter.
2. Enter the following item data:

Continued on next page

208 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Item 1: Schedule Item O (Origin)
Type:

Location ID: TRIEST
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Date: Today's date
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)

Select the Quick Confirmation indicator, and copy and paste the line item.
Change the following data:

Item 2: Schedule Item D (Destination)
Type:

Location ID: REF DE ING
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)
Date: Today's date + 5 days

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 209



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Select Quick Confirmation.
a) Enter the following item data:

Item 1: Schedule Item O (Origin)
Type:

Location ID: TRIEST
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Date: Today's date
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)

Select the Quick Confirmation indicator.
Select the first line item. Choose Copy item and Paste item.
Change the following data:

Item 2: Schedule Item D (Destination)
Type:

Location ID: REF DE ING
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Quantity: 30í000
UoM: M15
Date: Today's date + 5 days
Ref. doc. indicator: X (transfer)

Select the Quick Confirmation indicator.
Choose Save.

Continued on next page

210 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Task 4:
Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.

a) Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ Generate SPW→ As dialog task

Location ID: TRIEST, REF DE ING

Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Valuation Type: UNTAX

Execute the report by choosing F8.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
a) Check the Stock Projection Worksheet

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ List

Task 5:
Execute the shipment by creating the tickets for loading.
1. Create and actualize a ticket for the loaded quantity:

Ticket No.: TALPnnnn-##-LO (where nnnn ñ current
calendar year)

Ticket Type: Carrier Ticket
Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-##

Change the nominated quantity to 29999 M15.
Display the ticket and take a note of the documents that the system created.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 211



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

____________________________________________________
a) Create a ticket for the loaded quantity

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Ticket→ Create

Ticket No.: TALPnnnn-##-LO (where nnnn ñ current
calendar year)

Ticket Type: Carrier Ticket
Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-##

Choose Enter.
Select the first item line and Choose Enter.

Quantity: 29999

UoM: M15
End Date: Today's date

Choose Actualize.
Display the ticket by choosing Ticket→ Display. Select the Document
flow tab to see the generated documents.
Created documents: Reservation, TD Shipment, Load Confirmation
(Material Movement)

Continued on next page

212 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Task 6:
Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.

a) Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ Generate SPW→ As dialog task

Location ID: TRIEST, REF DE ING

Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Valuation Type UNTAX

Execute the report by choosing F8.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
a) Check the Stock Projection Worksheet

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ List

Task 7:
Execute the shipment by creating the tickets for discharging.
1. Create a ticket for the discharged quantity

Ticket Type: Carrier Ticket

Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-##

Change the nominated quantity to 29998 M15
Display the ticket and take a note of the documents that the system created.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 213



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

___________________________________________________
a) Create a ticket for the discharged quantity

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Ticket→ Create

Ticket No.: TALPnnnn-##-DC (where nnnn ñ current
calendar year)

Ticket Type: Carrier Ticket
Nomination No.: TALPnnnn-##

Choose Enter.
Mark the item line and choose ENTER

Quantity: 29998

UoM: M15
Date: Today's date

Choose Actualize.
Display the ticket by choosing Ticket→ Display. Select the Document
flow tab to see the generated documents.
Created documents: Reservation, TD Shipment, Delivery Confirmation
(Material Movement)

Continued on next page

214 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Pipeline Scheduling and Movement Execution

Task 8:
Check the Stock Projection Worksheet.
1. Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet.

a) Generate the Stock Projection Worksheet for location TRIEST:
Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ Generate SPW→ As dialog task

Location ID: TRIEST, REF DE ING

Transport System: PIPE CR DE
Material: ARAB_HEAVY-##
Valuation Type: UNTAX

Execute the report by choosing F8.
2. Check the Stock Projection Worksheet for location b, REF DE ING,

transport system PIPE CR DE and material ARAB_HEAVY-##.
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
a) Check the Stock Projection Worksheet

Logistics → Sales and Distribution → Bulk Scheduling →
Workbench→ Stock Projection→ List

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 215



Unit 4: Bulk Supply Chain Management (Inbound Distribution) IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Use the functions in the system to carry out various business processes and

describe the subcomponents of these processes
ï Explain TSW master data
ï Schedule and execute movements using Nominations, Tickets, Stock

Projection Worksheet (SPW) and Location Balancing.
ï Describe the various system capabilities, such as pipeline shipments

Related Information
More information on the possible settings for the master data and organizational
elements from the SCM view point is provided in Documentation for mySAP ERP
which is available on http://help.sap.com.

216 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Unit Summary

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Use the functions in the system to carry out various business processes and

describe the subcomponents of these processes
ï Explain TSW master data
ï Schedule and execute movements using Nominations, Tickets, Stock

Projection Worksheet (SPW) and Location Balancing.
ï Describe the various system capabilities, such as pipeline shipments

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 217



Unit Summary IOG100

218 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 5
Refinery: Silo Management, Refining,

Internal Movements

Unit Overview
Silo Management
The unit describes silo management, refining, internal movements. The scenario
goes trough Hydrocarbon Inventory Management (HPM) to Refinery processing
and Reporting of internal movements. There are no special scripts for instructorís
demo, use the exercises for every lesson for demonstration purposes. There are
business documents already created in the master system to help the instructor
with demonstration of document flows. The document numbers are mentioned in
comments for relevant lessons.

Hydrocarbon Product Management
Tank Management
Inventory Valuation

Refinery Processing
Crude and Feedstock to Raw Material Blend
Raw Material Blend to Intermediate (semi-finished) products
Semi-finished Products Blending; Transfer to Distribution Plant

Reporting
Production, Input / Output balance for Units, Loss
Production / Consumption Intermediates
Blending
Transfer to Distribution Plant

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Explain the differences between static and dynamic quantity conversions
ï List product types that can be handled by the Quantity Conversion Interface

(QCI)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 219



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

ï Demonstrate movements inside the refinery
ï Explain the reasons for differences between physical inventory and book

inventory
ï Demonstrate how to record physical inventory in the ERP system
ï Demonstrate how to analyze differences between physical and book

inventory and how to record gain or loss postings
ï Understand the processing at the refinery
ï Execute material movements to post the manufacturing process in the system
ï Execute material transfers to post output from production site to product

storage area
ï Understand reports for internal movements at the refinery on stages
ï Execute and explain report ñ material balance for Manufacturing Units
ï Execute and explain report ñ consumption of intermediates
ï Execute and explain report ñ materials blending
ï Execute and explain report ñ transfer movements to Distribution Plant

Unit Contents
Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .221

Exercise 7: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management ... . . . . . . .241
Lesson: Refinery processing .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .259

Exercise 8: Refinery processing.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .267
Lesson: Reporting ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .291

Exercise 9: Reporting ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .295

220 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain the processes of goods movements in a refinery, since the
handle of quantity conversion of the crude oil through the transfer of the finished
good to the distribution plant. The lesson focuses on Hydrocarbon Inventory
Management (quantity conversion interface and silos management) and inventory
movements.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Explain the differences between static and dynamic quantity conversions
ï List product types that can be handled by the Quantity Conversion Interface

(QCI)
ï Demonstrate movements inside the refinery
ï Explain the reasons for differences between physical inventory and book

inventory
ï Demonstrate how to record physical inventory in the ERP system
ï Demonstrate how to analyze differences between physical and book

inventory and how to record gain or loss postings

Business Example
Master data in International Oil Company and German Oil Company (VOIL
DE) have to be created according to the companyís business, which means that
materials, customers and vendors must have the Oil specific data view in Master
records provided by the solution SAP for Oil&Gas.

Silo Management and Hydrocarbon Product
Management
Oil companies deal with materials whose quantities are not the same at every place
or every time. A gasoline can be transferred from a hot city to a colder place.
When the gasoline arrives to destination, the material seems to be in a smaller
quantity. In order to overcome this misunderstanding oil industries control their
inventories in a common unit of measure considering the same temperature. Some
countries make use of M15 (m3 at 15C) or L15 (liters at 15C) while others use
M20 (m3 at 20C). There are other units of measure for oil products, but all of
them consider temperature as a pattern. According to the product, other factors
can be considered, such as pressure, vapor pressure, calorific value and density.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 221



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

The bulk oil products and gases are stored in tanks. SAP for Oil&Gas provides the
solution ìSilo Managementî to allow tank dips and comparison between physical
inventory (what is in the silo) and book inventory.

Figure 89: Petroleum Measurement Standards

VOIL Germany processes the purchase and sale of crude oil, gasoline, jet fuel,
lubricants, liquid petroleum gas and natural gas. The inventories must be managed
in different units of measure. At the time of delivery and goods receipt the user has
to enter quantity conversion parameters in the ERP system. All the movements for
bulk products in liquid form contain more than one unit of measure, considering
characteristics such as volume, mass, temperature and density. Other factors can
be considered depending on the product, like energy, heating value and pressure.

222 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Figure 90: Quantity conversion interface

Liquid oil products and gases are stored in a basic unit of measure, but they use
other units of measure to calculate the real volume stored or moved according to
external factors that impact this volume.
Solid products can have different units of measure for inventory, sales or
purchase, but the conversion between these units is based on a single arithmetical
calculation. The conversions between units of measures informed in the material
master are under the tab ìAdditional dataî.

Example: Base unit of measure : TO
Sales unit : KG
Purchase unit : L
Conversions : 1 TO = 1000 KG

1 KG = 1 L
1 TO = 1000 L

This kind of conversion is called static conversion, which means that the
temperature and other conversion parameters are fixed. The static conversion is
used for contracts, sales orders and purchase orders, i.e., when there is no goods
movements.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 223



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Oil products in liquid form and gases need to have their quantities calculated upon
a formula basis. This is call dynamic conversion. It allows volumes at ambient
temperature and densities at test temperature to be converted into densities,
volumes and masses at standard temperature. The oil quantity conversion is thus
used to convert the quantity of an oil product into various units of measure. The
dynamic conversion is used in documents where there is a goods movement and it
is reflected in the billing and invoice documents. Although the dynamic conversion
is performed during goods movements, it is necessary to inform a standard
conversion (like a static conversion) at Additional Data tab in Material Master.
From a technical point of view, the oil quantity conversion uses external c-code
programs, which are accessed through an interface within the Quantity Conversion
Interface (QCI). The c-code programs are usually licensed to SAP customers by
The American Petroleum Institute (API). The programs are called through fields
informed in view ìOil-specific dataî at Plant level in Material Master. These
fields are UoM Group (unit of measure group) and Conv. Group (conversion
group). The conversion group is linked to a reading group in Customizing that
calls the routine for conversion while the unit of measure group indicates in which
units of measure the movements will be stored in the system. The type of product
is identified by the conversion group, which also controls the tolerances for
differences between manual entries and values calculated by the system. Once
you fill in the Oil view to a material in a plant it becomes valid to all plants. If
the material is not linked to an UoM group and to a conversion group no dynamic
conversion is calculated.
Product types that require dynamic conversion:
ï Crude oil
ï Oil products
ï Chemicals
ï Lubricants
ï Asphalt / bitumen
ï Natural gas
ï Liquefied natural gas
ï Liquid petroleum gas
ï Water
ï Generalized gases
ï Industrial aromatic hydrocarbons
ï Raw materials
The Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI) converts volumes, masses and energy at
ambient conditions (temperature, pressure, vapor pressure, calorific value, density)
into volumes, masses and energy values at standard conditions. In addition, the
QCI calculates density and heating value at standard conditions. Example: a

224 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

company sells 15000 L of gasoline. The quantity must be converted to a quantity
in 15C if the base unit is L15 (liters at 15C), as the ambient temperature can
be different from origin to destination.
The QCI can convert quantities based on international standards for
ï Crude Oil & Petroleum Products (ISO, API, ASTM)
ï NGL /LPG (ISO, GPA, DIN)
ï Natural gas (ISO, AGA)
If the quantities of a material are always measured in mass (mass to mass
conversion), no dynamic conversion is required. However, Oil and Gas industries
usually measure their products in volume. Because the volume of an oil product
is dependent on the temperature of the product, a volume correction is needed to
calculate a standardized volume (example: 980 L of material at -15  C equals
1030 L at 60  C or 1000 Gal of material at 0F equals 1025 Gal at 70F). For gases,
the pressure under which the gas is kept plays a decisive role in the gas quantity
conversion. As a result, the volume of a gas is dependent on the temperature and
the pressure under which a specific quantity of gas is held.
Summary of Oil-specific data in Material Master
Base unit of measure: it is the unit of measure used to manage stocks. All other
units used for a material are converted to the base unit of measure.
UoM group: the unit of measure group allows inventory management in multiple
units of measure for a material. Quantities in all of the units of measure assigned
to the group are calculated during transactions, and the results are posted to
appendix tables in the Material Hierarchy Tables. Once stock is posted to the
material, the UoM group cannot then be changed.
Conv. Group: the conversion group defines the conversion routines that will be
used in the oil quantity conversion calculations.
Air Buoy. Fact: the air buoyancy factor serves to correct the calculated standard
density by balancing out the difference between the density in a vacuum and at
normal air pressure. This value is subtracted from the standard density before this
density is multiplied by the volume to calculate the mass.
Fix. Gravity: the fixed density has to be entered in the material master for
materials that are stored in the conversion group as chemical products (product
type). The fixed density is used in the IS-OIL quantity conversion, when
conversions are carried out between mass and volume units.
Conv. Coeff: the quantity conversion coefficient is used for oil materials with
'chemical' as the product type (defined in the conversion group). A fixed density is
assigned to the material and this, along with the coefficient of thermal expansion,
is used in the oil quantity conversion calculations to correct the volume to standard
temperature.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 225



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Excise duty group: the excise duty tax group to which a material belongs is a
user- defineable value. It allows materials to be treated in the same way for excise
duty purposes. The tax group to which a material belongs partially determines
the excise duty rate which applies for a movement of the material. However, it is
not applicable to all countries.
Oil content %: the oil content of the material determines what percentage of the
material moved is liable to excise duty.
Cust. Tariff nr: here you can enter a material-related customs tariff number. This
number can be used for reporting purposes.
Transfer sign: you can activate a material for two-step plant-to-plant transfer
tracking with the transfer sign. The following settings are possible:

' ' ñ no tracking available
1 ñ only statistical tracking
2 ñ tracking with gain/loss postings

It is not suitable for all countries.
Material tax group: it defines product type and tax convention applicability of a
material or group of materials only for Brazil.

Figure 91: Purchase and Sales with QCI

Oil and gas products are controlled in different units of measure that are informed
in the unit of measure group in material master. Besides the units defined in the
unit of measure group, different units of measure can be used in purchase orders
and sales orders. Thus, a crude oil can be measured in M15, L15, TO and KG but

226 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

VOIL International buys it in BB6 (barrels in 60F). The same process can happen
in the sales side, which means, the product with the same unit of measure group
can be sold in L. The oil and gas dynamic quantity conversion takes place during
goods movement. For contracts, purchase orders and sales orders the conversion
is only static.
On the purchase side, the static conversion is performed for contracts and purchase
orders. During goods receipt, the system looks for different units of measure from
those in the unit of measure group. If a different unit of measure is found, the
material document is posted with all units of measure, that is, all units from the
unit of measure group plus the one in the contract and / or purchase order. The
invoice receipt considers the value in the unit of measure informed in the purchase
order with the dynamic quantity conversion.
The same process is performed by the system in the sales cycle. In contracts and
sales order only the static conversion is performed. During the delivery process,
the dynamic oil and gas quantity conversion takes place. The system also looks for
different units of measure in the sales documents besides the ones from the unit of
measure group. The material document will be posted with all units of measure,
that is, the one from the unit of measure group plus the one from de sales order.
The billing document will be created with the unit of measure from the sales order
but with the quantity according to the dynamic oil and gas conversion.
Usually refineries do not purchase crude oil because the crude oil terminals are
responsible for this activity. In some countries refineries do not sell products
because they are all transferred to distribution terminal, while other countries
do not allow a refinery to operate a distribution terminal, so the refinery sells
the product to a distribution company.

Figure 92: Default Data

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 227



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

All oil and gas movements require the filling of parameters to convert the
quantities, such as temperature and density. In order to avoid errors during manual
input by the users, the system provides an automatic filling of those parameters.
Default data can be informed in the system considering plant, storage location,
material, date and time. The values informed in the default data will be used
during goods movements according to the date and time validity. The company
can define how often it will update the default data for certain materials. Example:
default data for crude oil can be updated every 2 hours while lubes are updated
only once a day.

Figure 93: Tank Management

Bulk liquid oil products are stored in tanks. Solid materials, like coke, are not
stored in silos or tanks. Silo Management or Tank Management is the R/3 solution
to allow a company to record physical material stocks in tanks or silos hourly,
daily or weekly. The tanks are created in the system with their calibration history.
Materials are assigned to tanks and tank dips are recorded. The physical stock
readings can be compared to the book inventories or goods movements in order
to post gains and losses periodically.

228 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Figure 94: Physical X Book Inventory

Physical inventory is the one stored in tanks or silos. Book inventory is the posted
inventory in transactions of goods receipts and goods issues. Periodically both
inventories must be compared. Missing entries can cause differences between
physical and book inventory. When a difference is not identified, an accounting
posting is done in order to adjust the quantities.

Figure 95: Tank Characteristics

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 229



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

The tank characteristics are defined as storage object characteristics. All they are
required for tank management. The storage object type should reflect the technical
aspects (size, floating or fix roof, etc), not the service, because the service may
be switched.
General tank data are:
ï Capacity of a tank (maximum capacity)
ï Allowable impurity quantity
ï Allowed mass
ï Throughput quantities
ï Calibration history
Data for volume calculation are correction factors that affect the tank volume
calculation:
ï Floating roof correction
ï Water correction
ï K- factor calculation: correction for the thermal expansion of the tank (with

or without taking into account the thermal insulation of the tank material)
ï Innage / Ullage procedures: innage is the volume of liquid in a tank while

ullage is the capacity of the tank not occupied by a liquid.
Calibration relevant data can be:
ï Calibration data that only has an informational character (for example, name

of the person that carried out the calibration)
ï Correction-relevant calibration data
Tank strapping table represents the basis for the volume calculation including
minimum and maximum dips. Based on the depth of a product in a tank, the
conversion tables can be used to determine the corresponding volume quantity.

230 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Figure 96: Assignment of Materials to Tanks

A tank is related to a storage location. It is possible to create:
ï One tank per one storage location
ï Two or more tanks per one storage location
ï One tank per one storage location, but different materials or materials with

different valuation types or batches or special stocks.
VOIL Germany set up each tank as a storage location under the refinery plant.
Materials are assigned to tanks in the master data for tanks. Depending on
configuration settings, one or more materials can be assigned to a tank. Multiple
materials can be in the same tank only if they have the same:
ï Base unit of measure
ï Unit of measure group
ï Conversion group
Chemicals materials need two more checks:
ï Fixed density
ï Thermal expansion coefficient

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 231



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

You can make the assignment based on the material number, batch, valuation type,
stock type and special stock, and limited to a specific time. As part of that process,
you can only assign a specific material segment per storage location to a tank once
at the same time. You can define a planned capacity for every material allocation.
If a tank is already in use and you want to assign another material to this tank, the
stock must be zero to the material segment in all units of measure (base unit of
measure plus all units from the unit of measure group for the material). Besides,
the date and time of the assignment must be after the last goods movement entered
in the system for the newly-assigned material segment.
If a material will be pumped out of the tank and it will be substituted for another
material, the old material has to have zero stock in all units of measure (base unit
of measure plus all units from the unit of measure group for the material). You
must also set the end date for the assignment of the material to the tank.

Figure 97: Measurements / Tank Dips

The main objective of silo management is volume calculation. Volumes are
usually to be calculated, either from meter readings (delta volume start versus end
reading) or from tank dip (opening dip / innage volume versus closing dip / innage
volume). Meter readings are not handled by Silos Management, but most refinery
process computers are handling this and provide the delta volume.
As refineries operate 24 hours per day and 7 days per week, the operator has to set
the time to track movements (usually at midnight or 6 a.m.). Usually a spreadsheet
is used to calculate the input and output balance for a 24 hours period.

232 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

A tank dip can be performed since that the tank strapping table is registered in
the system. Each dip is related to a tank volume. The following information is
required:
ï The dip height
ï Volume per height
ï Total volume for the dip height
The tank strapping table allows the knowledge of the minimum and maximum
dip, the tank capacity and the non-pumpable quantity according to configuration
settings.
Physical tank contents can be entered in the form of dip readings with information
on innage of product in a tank (or ullage, that is, the amount of empty space in
a tank), or enter the volume directly. Just remember that the direct input of the
volume is allowed for materials that do not require volume conversion. When
the height of material informed, the system uses the strapping table to calculate
the volume.
As more than one material can be assigned to a tank, the system looks for the first
material with default values in order to calculate the quantities in the alternative
units of measure. The height or volume refers to the whole tank, which can contain
various materials. The difference between the physical and the book inventory has
to be analyzed based on material sales volume or the number of goods movements
during the analysis period.
There are some prerequisites for entering tank dips at the time of the dip reading:
ï Calibration set activated
ï Materials assigned to the tank
The postings can be input by ecatts or they can also be automated with data feed
from process control, integration of Silo Management as volume calculator, and
a user front end for control, reconciliation and correction, and also for basic
operational reporting involving the use of BI to report and XI for data transmission
from refinery process control.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 233



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Figure 98: Reports

Analysis can be done through the following reports:
ï Display tank dips
ï Stock overview
ï Create tank analysis data
ï Tank gains and losses analysis or stock analysis based on goods movements
The tank dips report shows the following data for a tank and time period:
ï Total height of the tank dip
ï Material volume in the unit of measure of the tank strapping set
ï Material volume in the base unit of measure of the material segments

assigned to the tank
ï Book stock at the time of tank dip, considering the total of materials assigned

to the tank
ï Stock difference between physical and book inventories
The stock overview report shows the following data:
ï Cumulated book stock quantity in base unit of measure and in the volume

unit for the tank
ï Maximum tank capacity
ï Free tank capacity
The tank analysis data report allows an analysis of goods movements between
the individual dip readings. Depending on configuration settings analysis data can
be automatically updated. Run this report before analyse gains and losses.

234 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

The tank gains and losses analysis or stock analysis based on goods movements
report shows besides the tank dips:
ï Total movement dip difference: it is (the balance quantity of a material

in a tank between all previously analyzed tank dips) minus (the quantity
difference between the current and first analyzed tank dip) in base unit of
measure

ï Accumulated dip difference: it is the accumulated quantity difference
between tank dips in base unit of measure

ï Movement difference: it refers to the balance quantity of movements
between two successive tank dips

ï Accumulated movement difference: it is the accumulated balance quantity of
movements between successive tank dips or the balance of goods movements
between the current dip and the first analysed dip

ï Dip difference: it is the quantity difference between two successive tank
dips in base unit of measure

ï Movement dip difference: it is (the balance quantity of movements between
two successive tank dips) minus (quantity difference between two successive
tank dips in base unit of measure)

Double clicking a line it is possible to see the total of goods receipts and goods
issues for each material assigned to the tank. You can also drill down each material
to see all material documents created in that period.

Figure 99: Batches, Valuation Types and Special Stocks

Materials can be configured to work with batches. A batch can mean a real
batch number or a characteristic to identify the material. Example: a refinery or
a distribution plant can store materials for other companies. A specific material

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 235



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

from third parties can have the same material number, no matter if there are
many owners for the material. Each owner can be a batch to easily identify the
property of the material in reports, like material 01.000.001 batch Exxon; material
01.000.001 batch Shell.
The field ìbatchî is also used to inform a valuation type. Example: the same
material number can have two valuations, taxed and untaxed. The split valuation
is necessary to calculate taxes for oil products in some countries.
Materials can belong to special stocks, like consignment, sales order stock or stock
transfer. Thus, the system allows the display of own material which is stored in
third parties, reserved or in transit material.

Figure 100: TDP - Tariffs, Duties and Permits

Excise duties are handled in many different ways throughout the world. The
structure explained in this chapter applies to most countries. However, some
countries have so specific excise duties characteristics that SAP developed a
different solution for them.
TDP is an Oil functionality to allow the calculation and posting of excise duties
for dutiable goods. An excise duty is due when a goods movement takes place
based on the quantity of the material moved.

236 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Excise duties can be determined in the following operations:
ï Sales
ï Purchase
ï Transfer between plants
ï Production orders
The inventory is revaluated after changes in excise duty rates. It is possible to
separate the inventory into taxed and untaxed materials through split valuation
in material master.
There are some reductions and exemptions in excise duties that must be considered
during the systems configuration.
Prerequisites to work with excise duties
Some fields must be filled in the material master in order to make possible the
calculation of excise duties:
ï Excise duty group: it is on the Oil-Specific Data view. It activates the excise

duty determination. The excise duty group defines the way a material will be
handled from a tax point of view. Some changes regarding the excise duty
group will affect all the materials assigned to that group.

ï Oil content %: it is on the Oil-Specific Data view. It indicates the percentage
of the material that will be subject to excise duty.

ï Split valuation: the material must have at least two valuation types, like
ìtaxedî and ìuntaxedî.

ï Excise duty status: it is on the Accounting 2 view. It indicates if the material
is taxed or untaxed and it is related to each combination ìdutiable material /
batchî within a plant

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 237



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Features of excise duties
ï Handling type: it is used to find the correct excise duty rate during goods

movements. In purchasing, the handling type determines the excise duty
status of the material at the point of origin (vendorís location) while in
sales and stock transfers it occurs at the destination (customerís location or
destination plant). The settings for the handling type are dependent on the
regulations of local authorities. Some examples of handling types: untaxed,
reduced tax for heating, fully taxed. The handling type is informed in the
vendor master, customer master, purchase info record and customer material
info record.

ï Excise duty inventory: the untaxed material is listed with only the inventory
value. The taxed material (when the tax has already been paid) is composed
of the inventory value plus taxes

ï Excise duty postings: a goods movement from an excise duty free storage
location to an excise duty paid storage location leads to tax liability, while
the opposite movement leads to a tax claim.

ï Determination of the excise duty rate: an excise duty rate can be external or
internal. An external excise duty rate is always used for goods issues. The
rates and units of measure on which the rates are based are determined by
local legal authorities. The internal excise duty rates are maintained with the
price condition rates in the system. There is pricing indicator to determine
whether the excise duty rate will be external or internal for an order item.
It is informed in the customer master, customer material info record and
purchase info record.

ï Quantity conversion: a quantity conversion can be carried out to calculate
taxes. For example, a material can be sold at ambient temperature, but the
taxes are calculated at a specific temperature (example: liters at 15C).
The conversion group and the unit of measure group must be filled in the
Oil-specific data view in material master.

Excise duty revaluation
Excise duty revaluation is based on physical inventory and can be carried out after
any new excise duty rate / unit of measure / base quantity. When a new excise
duty rate is implemented, the new values are stored in the valuation record. The
system updates the excise duty inventory after every material movement.
The untaxed material is listed with only the inventory value. The taxed material
(when the tax has already been paid) is composed of the inventory value plus taxes.
Inventory movements (material/ plant combination) are blocked during
revaluation.

238 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Excise duty ñ Purchase
In the purchasing cycle, based on a default hierarchy, the system defaults excise
duty parameters in the purchase contract or purchase order and calculates the
excise duty based on those parameters. However, excise duty postings and
inventory postings take place at the time of the goods receipt.
For excise duty postings, it is critical to determine whether the material that is
being moved is excise duty paid or excise duty unpaid, and whether the receiving
plant/storage location has an ED-paid or an ED-unpaid status.
During goods movements (for a purchase), it is necessary to have two statuses for
excise duty calculation. The VOIL status is defined by the valuation type. The
trading partner's status is defined by the handling type. If both statuses are the
same, no excise duty posting will occur.

Excise duty ñ Sales
In the sales cycle, the system defaults the excise duty parameters, based on a
default hierarchy. The parameters are defaulted in the sales contract or in the
order. Using those parameters, the excise duty is calculated. However, excise duty
postings and inventory postings are made at the time of the goods issue.
For excise duty postings, it is decisive whether the material that is being moved is
excise duty paid or excise duty unpaid, and whether the receiving plant/storage
location has an ED paid or an ED unpaid status.
An example of sales scenario would be that a company delivers ED unpaid
material and the receiving plant/storage location is excise duty paid. That would
mean that an excise duty liability arises when a goods issue occurs. The company
pays excise duties to the local tax authority (a liability).
The company sends its customer the invoice for the gross price, meaning the
material price and the excise duty (claim).

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 239



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Figure 101: Nominations Processing with Meter / Dip Readings

Scheduling for the pipeline
The scheduling for the pipeline covers usually the transfer out of the Triest tank
into the pipeline and the transfer out of the pipeline into the refinery tank upon
arrival of the batch in the refinery. The same applies to transfers between the
refinery and the distribution plant: there is a transfer out of the tank in the refinery
into the pipeline and the transfer out of the pipeline into the tank in the distribution
plant.
A meter can be an additional parameter when a ticket arrives to SAP. The
measurements informed through the meter can make the system calculate the real
moved value, which means, the real volume into the ticket.
The measurement of a transfer between plants can also be done through tank dips.
Firstly the user creates the tank dips. While creating the ticket, the user calls
the tank dips during the gauge reading.

240 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Exercise 7: Hydrocarbon Inventory and
Tank Management
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Display oil specific data in the material master
ï Maintain the conversion (QCI) defaults for the material
ï Use the desktop calculator to display the quantities in the different units

of measure for the material
ï Display the tank master data
ï Use the LVCC test calculator and enter the values to calculate the material

volume
ï Create the tank dip readings
ï Post a material item transfer between locations with a nomination using

the dip readings

Business Example
In order to control oil inventory you use SAP for Oil&Gas which is a solution to
control quantities and volumes in tanks, the stock control in different units of
measure and postings to reflect the internal movements in a refinery.

Task:
You have to display oil specific data in the material master for REGULAR and
maintain the conversion (QCI) defaults for the material. Then you have to test with
desktop calculator the quantities in the different units of measure for the material.
1. Display material REGULAR in Plant 1101 to check the following

information:
Basic unit of measure:
Alternative units of measure for the static quantity conversion:
Conversion group:
Unit of measure group:

2. Maintain the conversion defaults for material REGULAR:
Plant: 1101
Storage location: T402
Material temperature: 20 CEL

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 241



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Test temperature: 15 CEL
Test density: 735 KGV

3. Use the desktop calculator to display the quantities in the different units of
measure for material REGULAR:
Plant: 1101
Storage location: T402
Transaction quantity:
230000 M15 at 5C
895630 BB6 at 25C

4. Display the following tank master data for tank T102 at Plant 1101:
Materials assigned to the tank:
Floating roof correction active or not:
Length unit of measure:
Volume unit of measure:
Volume at a height of 500 CM:

5. Use the LVCC test calculator and enter the following values to find the
material volume:
Total height: 800 CM
Material density: 750 KGV

6. Create the tank dip readings for tank T102 at plant 1101:
Initial reading
Sequential number: T102
Date & time: first day of the month ñ 6:00h
EVT: quantity entry standard dip
Material volume: 0
Final reading
Date & time: last day of the month -23:59h
EVT: Height entry standard dip
Total height: 998 CM
Display all the quantities.

7. Display the following data for Plant 1101 and storage location T102:

Continued on next page

242 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Display tank dips:
Stock overview:
Gain / loss analysis:

8. Display material ARAB_HEAVY in Plant 1101 to answer the questions:
What are the excise duty relevant fields and where they are located?
Is this material split valuated? Why?

9. Post a transfer between Triest Terminal and the Refinery in Ingolstadt
through a nomination with dip readings:
Nomination number: TAL+Year-##
Vehicle number: PIPE TR IN
Nomination type: CARR
Transport system: PIPE CR DE
Unit of measure: M15
Bulk shipment type: PIPU
Origin: Triest
Scheduled date: todayís date
Destination: Refinary Ingolstadt
Scheduled date: 5 days from today
Material: ARAB_HEAVY
Valuation type: UNTAX Quantity: 1000 M15
Create the open and close dips for the receiving tank in the refinery.
To create the tickets, use the ticket numbers:
Nomination number ñ item
Example: TAL2007-01-10; TAL2007-01-20
Ticket type: C ñ Carrier ticket
Create the ticket for the goods issue in Triest.
Create tank dips to the receiving tank in the refinery. Inform open and
close dips.
Create the ticket for the goods receipt in the refinery. Use the tank dips
previously created at exercise 7, step 6.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 243



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Solution 7: Hydrocarbon Inventory and
Tank Management
Task:
You have to display oil specific data in the material master for REGULAR and
maintain the conversion (QCI) defaults for the material. Then you have to test with
desktop calculator the quantities in the different units of measure for the material.
1. Display material REGULAR in Plant 1101 to check the following

information:
Basic unit of measure:
Alternative units of measure for the static quantity conversion:
Conversion group:
Unit of measure group:
a) Display the material REGULAR following the menu path:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Material Master→ Material
→ Display→ Display current
Or
Access the transaction code MM03
Type material REGULAR
Press Enter.
Select Oil-specific data and press Enter.
Input Plant 1101. Press Enter.
Basic unit of measure: M15
Select the icon Additional data to display the alternative units of
measure. Select Units of measure tab. The additional units of measure
are: L, L15, BB6, BBL, M3, KG and TO.
Click on Main data.
Conversion group: 534B
Unit of measure group: DC

2. Maintain the conversion defaults for material REGULAR:
Plant: 1101
Storage location: T402

Continued on next page

244 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Material temperature: 20 CEL
Test temperature: 15 CEL
Test density: 735 KGV
a) Access the transaction for default parameters following the menu path:

Logistics→ Materials Management → Inventory Management
→ Environment → Oil qty. Conversion → QCI (Quantity
Conversion Interface) parameter defaults: Oil&Gas materials→
Create/Display/Delete/Activate default parameters
Or
Access the transaction code O3DEFAULTS
Material: REGULAR
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T402
Click on the icon.
Click on the line next to the material name.
Inform:
Material temperature: 20 CEL
Test temperature: 15 CEL
Test density: 735 KGV
Click on the icon to activate the set.
Save the entry.

3. Use the desktop calculator to display the quantities in the different units of
measure for material REGULAR:
Plant: 1101
Storage location: T402
Transaction quantity:
230000 M15 at 5C
895630 BB6 at 25C
a) Access the desktop calculator following the menu path:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Oil qty. Conversion→ Oil&Gas Desktop Calculator
Or

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 245



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Access the transaction code O3QCITEST
Inform:
Material: REGULAR
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T402
Transaction quantity: 23000 M15
Press Enter.
Change the Material Temperature to 5 CEL.
The quantities are:

Figure 102: Quantities in the different units of measure for the
material at 5 CEL

Delete the Transaction Quantity and its unit of measure. Type 895630
BB6. Change the Material Temperature to 25 CEL.
The quantities are:

Continued on next page

246 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Figure 103: Quantities in the different units of measure for the
material at 25 CEL

4. Display the following tank master data for tank T102 at Plant 1101:
Materials assigned to the tank:
Floating roof correction active or not:
Length unit of measure:
Volume unit of measure:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 247



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Volume at a height of 500 CM:
a) Access the tank data following the menu path:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→ Silo
Management→ Change/create tank master data
Or
Access transaction code O4NA
Inform:
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T102
Press Enter.
The materials assigned to the tank are in Material Assignment Overview
Area: ARAB_HEAVY, ARAB_MEDIUM, ASPHALT_CRUDE,
HM_CRUDE and HNN_CRUDE.
Press the Specifications SO icon.
In the LVC area the floating roof correction is active.
Press the Linear to volumetric conversions LVCC icon.
The length unit of measure is CM.
The volume unit of measure is M15.
The volume at a height of 500 CM is 11.000,200 M15.
Do not leave this transaction

5. Use the LVCC test calculator and enter the following values to find the
material volume:
Total height: 800 CM
Material density: 750 KGV
a) Inside the tank master data, follow the menu path: Utilities→ Test

conversion.
Inform:
Total height: 800 CM
Material density: 750 KGV
Press Enter.
The material volume is 17.264,227 M15.

6. Create the tank dip readings for tank T102 at plant 1101:
Continued on next page

248 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Initial reading
Sequential number: T102
Date & time: first day of the month ñ 6:00h
EVT: quantity entry standard dip
Material volume: 0
Final reading
Date & time: last day of the month -23:59h
EVT: Height entry standard dip
Total height: 998 CM
Display all the quantities.
a) Create the tank dips following the menu path:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Silo Management→ Tank Dips
Or
Access the transaction code O4_TIGER.
Select the Transaction Create tank dips.
Plant: 1101
Storage location: T102
Sequential number: T102
Dip date & time: first day of the month ñ 6:00h
Click on Add entries Add
At the EVT column, select the option Quantity entry standard dip.
Just save it.
Post the final reading informing:
Dip date & time: last day of the month ñ 23:59h
Click on Add entries Add
At the EVT column, select the option Height entry standard dip. Inform
Total height: 998 CM
Press Enter.
Click on the line 1. Access the tab Quantities to see all the quantities.

7. Display the following data for Plant 1101 and storage location T102:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 249



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Display tank dips:
Stock overview:
Gain / loss analysis:
a) Display the reports for tank dips following the menu path:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Silo Management→ Tank Dips
Or
Access the transaction code O4_TIGER.
Select the Transaction Display tank dips.
Inform:
Plant: 1101
Storage location: T102
Sequential number: T102
Date & time from: first day of the month ñ 06:00h
To: last day of the month ñ 23:59h
Click on Add entries . Both entries informed for the month are
shown. Double click each one to display the details.
Stock Overview:
Just change the transaction to Stock overview.
Click on Add entries . The stock and the free capacity are shown.
Double click the line to display the quantities for each material assigned
to the tank.
Gain and Loss Analysis:
To run the Gain and Loss Analysis you have to run the transaction
O4_SILO_ANA_CREATE or follow the menu path:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→ Silo
Management→ Create tank analysis data
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T102
Sequence number: T102
Date & time from: first day of the month ñ 06:00:00
Date & time to: last day of the month ñ 23:59:59

Continued on next page

250 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Processing type: Create new (after last exists)
Run the report.
Now go to the tank dips:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Silo Management→ Tank Dips
Or
Access the transaction code O4_TIGER.
Select the Transaction Tank G/L analysis
Inform:
Plant: 1101
Storage location: T102
Sequential number: T102
Date & time from: first day of the month ñ 06:00h
To: last day of the month ñ 23:59h
Click on Add entries .
The differences are shown for each period. Double clicking each one
it is possible to see the goods movements for receipts and issues, and
double clicking each total you can see all the material movements.

8. Display material ARAB_HEAVY in Plant 1101 to answer the questions:
What are the excise duty relevant fields and where they are located?

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 251



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Is this material split valuated? Why?
a) Display material ARAB_HEAVY following the menu path:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Material Master→ Material
→ Display→ Display current
Or
Access the transaction code MM03.
Type ARAB_HEAVY.
Press Enter.
Select the views Oil-specific data and Accounting 2.
Inform Plant 1101.
Click on the matchcode for valuation type. Select UNTAX. At this time
we can see that the material is split valuated because of tax calculation
purposes.
Press Enter.
The excise duty relevant fields in Oil-specific data view are:
Excise duty group: 03
Oil content %: 100
The excise relevant field in Accounting 2 view is:
Excise duty status: UT (untaxed).

9. Post a transfer between Triest Terminal and the Refinery in Ingolstadt
through a nomination with dip readings:
Nomination number: TAL+Year-##
Vehicle number: PIPE TR IN
Nomination type: CARR
Transport system: PIPE CR DE
Unit of measure: M15
Bulk shipment type: PIPU
Origin: Triest
Scheduled date: todayís date
Destination: Refinary Ingolstadt
Scheduled date: 5 days from today
Material: ARAB_HEAVY

Continued on next page

252 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Valuation type: UNTAX Quantity: 1000 M15
Create the open and close dips for the receiving tank in the refinery.
To create the tickets, use the ticket numbers:
Nomination number ñ item
Example: TAL2007-01-10; TAL2007-01-20
Ticket type: C ñ Carrier ticket
Create the ticket for the goods issue in Triest.
Create tank dips to the receiving tank in the refinery. Inform open and
close dips.
Create the ticket for the goods receipt in the refinery. Use the tank dips
previously created at exercise 7, step 6.
a) Create the nomination following the menu path:

Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Workbench
→ Nomination→ Create
Or
Access the transaction code O4NCN
Fill in:
Nomination number: TALYear-##
Vehicle number: PIPE TR IN
Nomination type: CARR
Trans system: PIPE CR DE
UoM: M15
Bulk shipment type: PIPU
Press Enter
Inform for item 10:
Location ID: TRIEST
Schedule type: Origin ñ Transfer into in-transit / reservation
Scheduled material: ARAB_HEAVY
Scheduled quantity: 1000
Scheduled date: todayís date
Double click the line. Go to the tab ìItem detailî.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 253



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Fill in:
Valuation type origin: UNTAX
Valuation type destination: UNTAX
Select the line and click on the icon ìcopy itemî .
Then, click on ìpaste itemî .
Change the following fields:
Location ID: REF DE ING
Schedule type: Destination ñ transfer into location / reservation
Schedule date: 5 days from today
Double click the line. Go to the tab ìItem detailî.
Fill in:
Location partner plant: 1101
Storage location: T102
Valuation type origin: UNTAX
Valuation type destination: UNTAX
Press the ìCTRLî key and select both lines. Then, press Schedule
+ Confirm.
Save the nomination.
Now create the ticket for the goods issue in Triest.
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Workbench
→ Ticket→ Create
Or
Access the transaction code O4TEN.
Or
Inside the nomination, select an item and follow the menu: Nomination
→ Ticket
Inform:
Ticket external number: nomination number-item. Example:
TAL2007-01-10 Ticket type: C - carrier ticket
Nomination number: nomination number you have just created
Press Enter.

Continued on next page

254 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

Select the item for which you want to create the nomination and press
Enter.
Tab ìmovement detailî
Quantity: 1000 M15
End date: todayís date
Press Actualize
See the documents created through the ticket by displaying the
nomination item:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Workbench
→ Nomination→ Display
Or
Access transaction O4NSN
At the ìNomination Overviewî area select the option ìNomination
numberî and inform the number of your nomination.
Drill down the transport system and the nomination number and double
click on the nomination key.
Double click item 10. Go to the tab ìDocumentsî. Click next to the
ticket number and click on ìDocument flowî. The system shows the
number of the following documents: reservation, TD shipment and
load confirmation.
Now register the goods receipt in silos management through an opening
tank dip (before the receipt) and a close dip (after the receipt).
Follow the menu:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Silo Management→ Tank Dips
Or
Access transaction code O4_TIGER
Choose the transaction ìCreate tank dipsî
Inform
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T102
Sequence number: T102
Click on ìAdd entriesî Add
Choose EVT: Opening dip height entry or Height entry standard dip

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 255



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Total height: 100
Press Enter
Select the line to verify the conversion parameters at tab ìQuantitiesî.
Save the dip.
Do not leave the transaction.
Click on ìAdd entriesî Add
Choose EVT: Height entry standard dip
Total height: 145
Press Enter
Select the line to verify the conversion parameters at tab ìQuantitiesî.
Save the dip.
Now create the ticket for the goods receipt at the refinery.
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Workbench
→ Ticket→ Create
Or
Access the transaction code O4TEN.
Or
Inside the nomination, select an item and follow the menu: Nomination
→ Ticket
Inform:
Ticket external number: nomination number-item. Example:
TAL2007-01-20 Ticket type: PM3 ñ Physical Measurement - Gauge
reading Nomination number: nomination number you have just created
Press Enter.
Tab ìmovement detailî
End date: todayís date
Tab ìGauge readingî
Inform the dates for ìOpen dipî and ìClose dipî according to the tank
dips posted in the last step. Press Enter.
Select the open and close dip through the matchcode.
Press Enter.
Save the ticket.

Continued on next page

256 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Hydrocarbon Inventory and Tank Management

The ticket type PM3 - Physical Measurement - Gauge reading does not
actualize the documents, that means, it does not create a reservation,
a TD document and a material document. To do so, you will have to
create a carrier ticket. Another option is to configure a new ticket type
copying PM3 and select the actualization box. As configuration is not
covered by this course, just create a carrier ticket typing the quantities
calculated by the gauge reading ticket.
Inform:
Ticket external number: nomination number-item+1. Example:
TAL2007-01-21 Ticket type: C - carrier ticket
Nomination number: nomination number you have just created
Press Enter.
Tab ìmovement detailî
Quantity: the quantity calculated by the gauge reading
End date: todayís date
Press .
See the documents created through the ticket by displaying the
nomination item:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk Scheduling→ Workbench
→ Nomination→ Display
Or
Access transaction O4NSN
At the ìNomination Overviewî area select the option ìNomination
numberî and inform the number of your nomination.
Drill down the transport system and the nomination number and double
click on the nomination key.
Double click item 20. Go to the tab ìDocumentsî.
Click next to the second ticket number and click on ìDocument flowî.
The system shows the number of the following documents: reservation,
TD shipment and delivery confirmation.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 257



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain the differences between static and dynamic quantity conversions
ï List product types that can be handled by the Quantity Conversion Interface

(QCI)
ï Demonstrate movements inside the refinery
ï Explain the reasons for differences between physical inventory and book

inventory
ï Demonstrate how to record physical inventory in the ERP system
ï Demonstrate how to analyze differences between physical and book

inventory and how to record gain or loss postings

Related Information
More information on the possible settings for the master data and organizational
elements from the Oil view is at http://help.sap.com→ SAP for Industries→ SAP
for Oil & Gas→ SAP Oil & Gas 4.72→ SAP Oil & Gas (IS-Oil Downstream)→
HPM - Hydrocarbon Product Management

258 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Lesson: Refinery processing
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain the refinery processes at the production site. It also covers
the modeling of refinery processes and manufacturing units within inventory
management (MM-IM). Next part of the lesson considers material movements in a
refinery, since the initial input of raw materials to production site until the transfer
of the finished products to the distribution plant.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Understand the processing at the refinery
ï Execute material movements to post the manufacturing process in the system
ï Execute material transfers to post output from production site to product

storage area

Business Example
As the raw material stock is at the refinery site the processing cycle is started. It is
necessary to post materials input and output by manufacturing units in the system.
After the refinery processing is accomplished the movement of finished products
from production site to product storage area to be posted in the system as well.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 259



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Refinery Processing

Figure 104: Refinery Processing

From the crude oil processing until the finished product many materials are
processed through the refinery flow plan.
The main units in a refinery are:
ï CDU: Atmospheric Distillation
ï VDU: Vacuum Distillation Unit
ï RF: Catalytic Reformer Unit
ï CC: Catalytic Cracking Unit
The material transformations, productions and losses are reported through material
movements:
ï Transfers: movement type 309
ï Goods issue / consumption: movement type 201
ï Losses: movement type 551
For a production environment new movement types should be considered, e.g. a
copy of 309 to reflect production, another copy to reflect blending, etc. This way
these refinery conversion movements can be distinguished from standard re-brand
and Bill of Material postings. The same applies to consumption and losses.

260 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Figure 105: Crude and Feedstock to Raw Material Blend

The crude oil enters in the CDU (Atmospheric Distillation Pipe still) to be
transformed into a raw material blend.
Example: material ARAB_HEAVY (-) is transformed into RAW_MAT_BLEND
(+). The movement type 309 posts this process.

Figure 106: Raw Material Blend to Intermediate (semi-finished) products

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 261



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

The raw material blend is converted into the CDU (atmospheric pipestill) into
intermediate products such as gas, LPG, naphtha, kerosene and distillate.
Example: material RAW_MAT_BLEND (-) is transformed into LPG (+). The
movement type 309 posts this process.
After appointing the productive process, it is possible to post refinery
consumptions and gains / losses for the pipestill.
Example: Consumption of material TOP_GAS through movement type 201 and
loss of material RAW_MAT_BLEND through movement type 551.

Semi-finished Products Blending

Reforming of Virgin Naphta

Figure 107: Reforming of Virgin Naphta

Naphtha produced in the Pipestill is converted in the reformer into gas, hydrogen,
LPG and reformate. The postings are done through movement type 309.
The consumptions in the reformer are posted through movement type 551 while
the gains / losses are posted through movement type 201.

262 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Vacuum Distillation at Atmospheric Residue

Figure 108: Vacuum Distillation at Atmospheric Residue

Pipestill vacuums are upgraded in the Vacuum Distillation Unit (VDU). Here the
atmospheric residue is transformed into materials like vacuum gasoil and vacuum
residue. The movement type 309 reflects the operations.
The gain and loss postings of the atmospheric residue in the VDU are done
through movement type 501.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 263



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Cracking of Vacuum Gasoil

Figure 109: Cracking of Vacuum Gasoil

Vacuum Gasoil produced in the Vacuum Distillation Unit is transformed in the
Catalytic Cracker.
The Catalytic Cracker unity recovers more light intermediate products, such as
cracked LPG and cracked naphtha. Like the former operations, the productive
process is posted through movement type 309, the consumptions are posted
through movement type 201 and gains / losses through 501.

264 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Blending

Figure 110: Blending

Intermediate materials are blended to finished products and transferred to the
distribution plant.
Examples:
ï Blending of Regular: from CRACK_NAPHTHA (-) to REGULAR (+)
ï Blending of Premium: from VIRGIN_NAPHTA (-) to PREMIUM (+)
ï Blending of Diesel: from GASOIL 1 (-) to DIESEL (+)

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 265



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Transfer to Distribution Plant

Figure 111: Transfer to Distribution Plant

In most countries it is possible to post the transfer of finished products from
refinery to distribution plant through movement types 309 or 301. The user
informs the respective data for origin and destination: plant, storage location and
batch. Some countries have specific laws that demand the tax calculation during
transfer postings, so some localization requirements must be met, like specific
movement types.

266 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Exercise 8: Refinery processing
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Post the material movements for the refinery processing.

Business Example
As the raw material stock is at the refinery site the processing cycle is started. It is
necessary to post materials input and output by manufacturing units in the system.
After the refinery processing is accomplished the movement of finished products
from production site to product storage area to be posted in the system as well.

Task:
You heed to post in the system the material movements for the refinery processing.
This allows to save the daily snap-shot for material movements in the system
and control material balance.
1. Post the following crude oils and feedstocks to raw material blend in

plant 1101:
Material slip: CDU-IN
Origin

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

ARAB_HEAVY 7850 T102 UNTAX
URAL 2150 T106 UNTAX

Destination

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
RAW_MAT_BLEND CDU1 UNTAX

2. Post the raw material blend to the following intermediate products in
plant 1101:
Material slip: CDU-OUT
Origin

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 267



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
RAW_MAT_BLEND CDU1 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

TOP_GAS 200 CDU1 UNTAX
LPG 300 T802 UNTAX
VIR- 500 T701 UNTAX
GIN_NAPH-
THA
VIR- 1500 PF01 UNTAX
GIN_NAPH-
THA
KEROSENE 1500 T606 UNTAX
GASOIL 1 500 T603 UNTAX
GASOIL 2 1000 T604 UNTAX
GASOIL 3 2000 T605 UNTAX

ATM_RESIDUE 500 T507 UNTAX
ATM_RESIDUE 1999 CDU1 UNTAX

3. Post the unit loss and consumption in plant 1101:
All materials are from valuation type UNTAX
Material slip: CDU-OUT
Loss of RAW_MAT_BLEND
Quantity: 1,001 M15
Storage Location: CDU1
G/L Account: 410001
Cost center: 1101
Consumption of TOP_GAS
Quantity: 200 M15
Storage Location: CDU1
G/L Account: 410000

Continued on next page

268 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Cost center: 1101
4. Post the reforming of virgin naphtha in plant 1101:

Material slip: REFORMER OUT
Origin

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
VIRGIN_NAPHTHA PF01 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

TOP_GAS 25 PF01 UNTAX
HYDREGEN 75 PF01 UNTAX
LPG 175 T802 UNTAX
REFORMATE 1224 T703 UNTAX

5. Post the vacuum distillation at atmospheric residue in plant 1101:
Material slip: VDU-OUT
Origin

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
ATM_RESIDUE VDU1 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

VAC- 1200 CCR1 UNTAX
UUM_GASOIL
VAC- 798 T506 UNTAX
UUM_RESIDUE

6. Post the loss at vacuum pipestill in plant 1101:
Material slip: VDU-OUT
Loss of ATM_RESIDUE Quantity: 1 M15

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 269



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Storage Location: VDU1
G/L Account: 410001
Cost center: 1101

7. Post the cracking of vacuum gasoil in plant 1101:
Material slip: CCR-OUT
Origin

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
VACUUM_GASOIL CCR1 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

TOP_GAS 15 CCR1 UNTAX
CRACK_LPG 75 T801 UNTAX
CRACK_NAPH- 1000 T705 UNTAX
THA
CRACK_DIS- 500 T602 UNTAX
TILLATE
CRACK_BOT- 100 T508 UNTAX
TOMS
CRACK_BOT- 9 CCR1 UNTAX
TOMS

8. Post the cat crackerís loss and own consumption in plant 1101:
Material slip: CCR-OUT
All materials are from valuation type UNTAX.
Loss of Vacuum Gasoil
Quantity: 1 M15
Storage Location: CCR1
G/L Account: 410001
Cost center: 1101
Consumption of:
TOP_GAS: 15 M15

Continued on next page

270 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Storage Location: CCR1
CRACK_BOTTOMS: 9 M15
Storage Location: CCR1
G/L Account: 410000
Cost center: 1101

9. Post the blending of regular in plant 1101:
Material slip: BL MOGAS
Origin

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
REGULAR T402 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

CRACK_LPG 47,5 T801 UNTAX
LPG 95 T802 UNTAX
CRACK_ 95 T705 UNTAX
NAPHTA
VIRGIN_ 142,5 T701 UNTAX
NAPHTHA
REFORMATE 570 T703 UNTAX

10. Transfer material REGULAR:
Material slip: TRANSFER
Origin: Plant: 1101
Storage location: T402
Valuation type: UNTAX
Destination:
Plant: 1102
Storage location: BULK
Valuation type: UNTAX
Quantity: 500 M15

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 271



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Solution 8: Refinery processing
Task:
You heed to post in the system the material movements for the refinery processing.
This allows to save the daily snap-shot for material movements in the system
and control material balance.
1. Post the following crude oils and feedstocks to raw material blend in

plant 1101:
Material slip: CDU-IN
Origin

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

ARAB_HEAVY 7850 T102 UNTAX
URAL 2150 T106 UNTAX

Destination

Continued on next page

272 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
RAW_MAT_BLEND CDU1 UNTAX

a) Access the transaction Transfer Posting trough the menu:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Transfer Posting
Or
Access the transaction code MB1B
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: CDU-IN
Movement type: 309
Plant: 1101
Press Enter.
Rcvg Sloc: CDU1
Rcvg Material: RAW_MAT_BLEND
Type the data for the origin materials:

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

ARAB_HEAVY 7850 T102 UNTAX
URAL 2150 T106 UNTAX

Press Enter.
Inform the Handling Type: HT = 00 for each material and type Enter.
Save the material document.

2. Post the raw material blend to the following intermediate products in
plant 1101:
Material slip: CDU-OUT
Origin

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 273



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
RAW_MAT_BLEND CDU1 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

TOP_GAS 200 CDU1 UNTAX
LPG 300 T802 UNTAX
VIR- 500 T701 UNTAX
GIN_NAPH-
THA
VIR- 1500 PF01 UNTAX
GIN_NAPH-
THA
KEROSENE 1500 T606 UNTAX
GASOIL 1 500 T603 UNTAX
GASOIL 2 1000 T604 UNTAX
GASOIL 3 2000 T605 UNTAX

ATM_RESIDUE 500 T507 UNTAX
ATM_RESIDUE 1999 CDU1 UNTAX

a) Access the transaction Transfer Posting trough the menu:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Transfer Posting
Or
Access the transaction code MB1B
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: CDU-OUT
Movement type: 309
Plant: 1101
Press Enter.
Rcvg Sloc: CDU1

Continued on next page

274 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Rcvg Material: TOP_GAS

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

RAW_MAT_ 200 CDU1 UNTAX
BLEND

Press Enter.
Inform handling type HT = 00
Press Enter.
Click on icon to post the next material.
Rcvg Sloc: T802
Rcvg Material: LPG

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

RAW_MAT_ 300 CDU1 UNTAX
BLEND

Press Enter.
Inform handling type HT = 00
Press Enter.
Click on icon to post the next material.
Repeat the same process for all materials following the correct
quantities and storage locations. When finish, press the icon to
save the material document.

3. Post the unit loss and consumption in plant 1101:
All materials are from valuation type UNTAX
Material slip: CDU-OUT
Loss of RAW_MAT_BLEND
Quantity: 1,001 M15
Storage Location: CDU1
G/L Account: 410001
Cost center: 1101

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 275



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Consumption of TOP_GAS
Quantity: 200 M15
Storage Location: CDU1
G/L Account: 410000
Cost center: 1101
a) Access the transaction for goods issues following the menu:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Goods Issue (MIGO)
Or
Inform the transaction code MIGO_GI
Use the options ìGoods Issueî and ìOtherî on the head of the
document.
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: CDU-OUT
Go to tab ìMaterialî
Fill in RAW_MAT_BLEND
Go to tab ìQuantityî
Fill in 1,001
Go to tab ìWhereî
Fill in:
Movement Type 551
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: CDU1
Press Enter.
Go to ìAccount Assignmentî tab
G/L Account: 410001
Cost Center: 1101
Go to ìExcise Dutyî Tab
Handling Type: 00
Click on to input the next material.

Continued on next page

276 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Material: TOP_GAS
Go to tab ìQuantityî
Fill in 200
Go to tab ìWhereî
Fill in:
Movement Type: 201
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: CDU1
Press Enter.
Go to ìAccount Assignmentî tab
G/L Account: 410000
Cost Center: 1101
Go to ìExcise Dutyî Tab
Handling Type: 00
Save the material document.
Another transaction can be used to post goods issue: MB1A
Menu path: Logistics → Materials Management → Inventory
Management→ Goods Movement→ Goods Issue
Loss of RAW_MAT_BLEND
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: CDU-OUT
Movement type: 551
Plant: 1101
Storage location: CDU1
Press enter.
G/L Account: 410001
Cost center: 1001
Material: RAW_MAT_BLEND
Quantity: 1,001
Batch: UNTAX

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 277



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Press enter.
HT: 00
Press enter.
Save the material document.
Consumption of TOP_GAS:
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: CDU-OUT
Movement type: 201
Plant: 1101
Storage location: CDU1
Press enter.
G/L Account: 410000
Cost center: 1001
Material: RAW_MAT_BLEND
Quantity: 200
Batch: UNTAX
Press enter.
HT: 00
Press enter.
Save the material document.

4. Post the reforming of virgin naphtha in plant 1101:
Material slip: REFORMER OUT
Origin

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
VIRGIN_NAPHTHA PF01 UNTAX

Destination

Continued on next page

278 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

TOP_GAS 25 PF01 UNTAX
HYDREGEN 75 PF01 UNTAX
LPG 175 T802 UNTAX
REFORMATE 1224 T703 UNTAX

a) Access the transaction Transfer Posting trough the menu:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Transfer Posting
Or
Access the transaction code MB1B
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: REFORMER OUT
Movement type: 309
Plant: 1101
Press Enter.
Rcvg SLoc: PF01
Rcvg Material: TOP_GAS

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

VIR- 25 PF01 UNTAX
GIN_NAPH-
THA

Press Enter.
Inform Handling Type: 00
Press Enter.
Click on icon to post the next material.
Repeat the same process for all materials following the correct
quantities and storage locations. When finish, press the icon to
save the material document.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 279



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

5. Post the vacuum distillation at atmospheric residue in plant 1101:
Material slip: VDU-OUT
Origin

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
ATM_RESIDUE VDU1 UNTAX

Destination

Continued on next page

280 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

VAC- 1200 CCR1 UNTAX
UUM_GASOIL
VAC- 798 T506 UNTAX
UUM_RESIDUE

a) Access the transaction Transfer Posting trough the menu:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Transfer Posting
Or
Access the transaction code MB1B
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: VDU OUT
Movement type: 309
Plant: 1101
Press Enter.
Rcvg SLoc: CCR1
Rcvg Material: VACUUM_GASOIL

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

ATM_RESIDUE 1200 VDU1 UNTAX

Type Enter.
Click on icon to post the next material.
Repeat the same process for the next material following the correct
quantity and storage location. When finish, press the icon to save
the material document.

6. Post the loss at vacuum pipestill in plant 1101:
Material slip: VDU-OUT
Loss of ATM_RESIDUE Quantity: 1 M15
Storage Location: VDU1

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 281



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

G/L Account: 410001
Cost center: 1101
a) Access the transaction for goods issues following the menu:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Goods Issue (MIGO)
Or
Inform the transaction code MIGO_GI Use the options ìGoods Issueî
and ìOtherî on the head of the document.
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: VDU-OUT
Go to tab ìMaterialî
Fill in ATM_RESIDUE
Go to tab ìQuantityî
Fill in 1
Go to tab ìWhereî
Fill in: Movement Type 551
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: VDU1
Press Enter.
Go to ìAccount Assignmentî tab
G/L Account: 410001
Cost Center: 1101
Go to ìExcise Dutyî Tab
Handling Type: 00
Save the material document.

7. Post the cracking of vacuum gasoil in plant 1101:
Material slip: CCR-OUT
Origin

Continued on next page

282 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
VACUUM_GASOIL CCR1 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

TOP_GAS 15 CCR1 UNTAX
CRACK_LPG 75 T801 UNTAX
CRACK_NAPH- 1000 T705 UNTAX
THA

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 283



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

CRACK_DIS- 500 T602 UNTAX
TILLATE
CRACK_BOT- 100 T508 UNTAX
TOMS
CRACK_BOT- 9 CCR1 UNTAX
TOMS

a) Access the transaction Transfer Posting trough the menu:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Transfer Posting
Or
Access the transaction code MB1B
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: CCR OUT
Movement type: 309
Plant: 1101
Press Enter.
Rcvg SLoc: CCR1
Rcvg Material: TOP_GAS

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

VAC- 15 CCR1 UNTAX
UUM_GASOIL

Press Enter.
Inform Handling Type: 00
Press Enter.
Click on icon to post the next material.
Repeat the same process for all materials following the correct
quantities and storage locations. When finish, press the icon to
save the material document.

Continued on next page

284 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

8. Post the cat crackerís loss and own consumption in plant 1101:
Material slip: CCR-OUT
All materials are from valuation type UNTAX.
Loss of Vacuum Gasoil
Quantity: 1 M15
Storage Location: CCR1
G/L Account: 410001
Cost center: 1101
Consumption of:
TOP_GAS: 15 M15
Storage Location: CCR1
CRACK_BOTTOMS: 9 M15
Storage Location: CCR1
G/L Account: 410000
Cost center: 1101
a) Access the transaction for goods issues following the menu:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Goods Issue (MIGO)
Or
Inform the transaction code MIGO_GI
Use the options ìGoods Issueî and ìOtherî on the head of the
document.
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: CCR-OUT
Go to tab ìMaterialî
Fill in VACUUM_GASOIL
Go to tab ìQuantityî
Fill in 1
Go to tab ìWhereî
Fill in:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 285



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Movement Type 551
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: CCR1
Press Enter.
Go to ìAccount Assignmentî tab
G/L Account: 410001
Cost Center: 1101
Go to ìExcise Dutyî Tab
Handling Type: 00
Click on to input the next material.
Material: TOP_GAS
Go to tab ìQuantityî
Fill in 15
Go to tab ìWhereî
Fill in:
Movement Type: 201
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: CCR1
Press Enter.
Go to ìAccount Assignmentî tab
G/L Account: 410000
Cost Center: 1101
Go to ìExcise Dutyî Tab
Handling Type: 00
Click on to input the next material.
Material: CRACK_BOTTOMS
Go to tab ìQuantityî
Fill in 9
Go to tab ìWhereî
Fill in:

Continued on next page

286 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Movement Type: 201
Plant: 1101
Storage Location: CCR1
Press Enter.
Go to ìAccount Assignmentî tab
G/L Account: 410000
Cost Center: 1101
Go to ìExcise Dutyî Tab
Handling Type: 00
Save the material document.

9. Post the blending of regular in plant 1101:
Material slip: BL MOGAS
Origin

Material Storage Location Valuation Type
REGULAR T402 UNTAX

Destination

Material Quantity (M15) Storage Valuation Type
Location

CRACK_LPG 47,5 T801 UNTAX
LPG 95 T802 UNTAX
CRACK_ 95 T705 UNTAX
NAPHTA
VIRGIN_ 142,5 T701 UNTAX
NAPHTHA
REFORMATE 570 T703 UNTAX

a) Access the transaction Transfer Posting trough the menu:
Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Transfer Posting
Or
Access the transaction code MB1B

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 287



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: BL MOGAS
Movement type: 309
Plant: 1101
Press Enter.
Rcvg SLoc: T402 Rcvg
Material: REGULAR

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

CRACK_LPG 47,5 T801 UNTAX
LPG 95 T802 UNTAX
CRACK_NAPH- 95 T705 UNTAX
THA
VIR- 142,5 T701 UNTAX
GIN_NAPH-
THA
REFORMATE 570 T703 UNTAX

Press Enter.
Inform Handling Type: 00 for all materials.
Press Enter.
Press the icon to save the material document.

10. Transfer material REGULAR:
Material slip: TRANSFER
Origin: Plant: 1101
Storage location: T402
Valuation type: UNTAX
Destination:
Plant: 1102
Storage location: BULK
Valuation type: UNTAX

Continued on next page

288 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Refinery processing

Quantity: 500 M15
a) Access the transaction Transfer Posting trough the menu:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Goods Movement→ Transfer Posting
Or
Access the transaction code MB1B
Document date: todayís date
Posting date: todayís date
Material Slip: TRANSFER
Movement type: 309
Plant: 1101
Press Enter.
Receiving Plant: 1102
Rcvg SLoc: BULK
Rcvg Material: REGULAR

Material Quantity Storage Batch
Location

REGULAR 500 T402 UNTAX

Press Enter.
Inform Handling Type: 00
Press Enter.
Save the material document.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 289



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Understand the processing at the refinery
ï Execute material movements to post the manufacturing process in the system
ï Execute material transfers to post output from production site to product

storage area

290 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Reporting

Lesson: Reporting
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain the reporting needs on processes of material movements
in a refinery, since the initial input of raw materials to production site until the
transfer of the finished products to the distribution plant. The lesson focuses on
standard reports which are available in SAP ECC 6.0 (IS-OIL 6.0) to analyze
inventory and material movements.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Understand reports for internal movements at the refinery on stages
ï Execute and explain report ñ material balance for Manufacturing Units
ï Execute and explain report ñ consumption of intermediates
ï Execute and explain report ñ materials blending
ï Execute and explain report ñ transfer movements to Distribution Plant

Business Example
After the refinery processing, represented by internal movements, is accomplished
it is required to prepare reports. The reports to be cover manufacturing balance,
consumption of intermediates, blending of products and transfer postings from
production site to product storage area.

Reporting

Figure 112: Reporting

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 291



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

The most suitable standard report for refinery movements is the one named
ìStock on Posting Dateî, accessed through transaction MB5B or menu path
Materials Management→ Inventory Management→ Environment→ Stock→
Stock for Posting Date. The user has to inform material, plant, storage location
and selection date.

Figure 113: Production, Input / Output Balance for Units, Loss

The report ìStock on Posting Dateî shows all the material documents in the
selection date. It also shows the total of goods issues and goods receipts by
material. The resulting stock within a unit must be zero.

Figure 114: Production / Consumption Intermediates

The resulting stock position is not zero; opening and closing are shown.

292 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Reporting

Figure 115: Blending

The movements in the selection date are shown with plant and storage location.

Figure 116: Transfer to Distribution Plant

The movements in the selection date are shown with plant and storage location.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 293



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Some countries have specific tax laws that do not allow the usage of transfer
postings in only one step. For these situations, use also report MB5T ñ Stock
in Transit (menu path Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock in Transit) ñ to display the dispatched material that
has not been arrived to the destination.

294 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Reporting

Exercise 9: Reporting
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Understand reports for internal movements at the refinery on stages
ï Execute and explain report ñ material balance for Manufacturing Units
ï Execute and explain report ñ consumption of intermediates
ï Execute and explain report ñ materials blending
ï Execute and explain report ñ transfer movements to Distribution Plant

Business Example
After the refinery processing, represented by internal movements, is accomplished
it is required to prepare reports. The reports to be cover manufacturing balance,
consumption of intermediates, blending of products and transfer postings from
production site to product storage area.

Task:
Run a number of reports to control refinery processing:
1. Run the report ìStock on Posting Dateî for the movements in the

Atmospheric Pipestill.

Plant: 1101

Storage Location: CDU1

Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to exercise
8.

2. Run the report ìStock on Posting Dateî for the movements of production
and consumption of intermediates.

Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T701, T703 and T705

Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to exercise
8.

3. Run the report ìStock on Posting Dateî for the movements of blending
and transfers.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 295



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T402

Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to exercise
8.

296 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Reporting

Solution 9: Reporting
Task:
Run a number of reports to control refinery processing:
1. Run the report ìStock on Posting Dateî for the movements in the

Atmospheric Pipestill.

Plant: 1101

Storage Location: CDU1

Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to exercise
8.
a) Access the report ìStock on Posting Dateî following the menu:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock for Posting Date
Or
Type transaction MB5B
Fill in:

Plant: 1101
Storage Location: CDU1

Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to
exercise 8.
Run the report clicking on
Movements for materials ATM_RESIDUE, RAW_MAT_BLEND and
TOP_GAS are shown.

2. Run the report ìStock on Posting Dateî for the movements of production
and consumption of intermediates.

Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T701, T703 and T705

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 297



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to exercise
8.
a) Access the report ìStock on Posting Dateî following the menu:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock for Posting Date
Or
Type transaction MB5B
Fill in:

Plant: 1101

Storage Location: click on the arrow to inform the storage locations:
T701, T703 and T705. Click on icon.
Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to
exercise 8
Run the report clicking on .
Movements for materials CRACK_NAPHTHA, REFORMATE and
VIRGIN_NAPHTHA are shown.

3. Run the report ìStock on Posting Dateî for the movements of blending
and transfers.

Plant: 1101
Storage Location: T402

Continued on next page

298 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Reporting

Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to exercise
8.
a) Access the report ìStock on Posting Dateî following the menu:

Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock for Posting Date
Or
Type transaction MB5B
Fill in:

Plant: 1101

Storage Location: click on the arrow to inform the storage locations:
T402 and T404. Click on icon.
Selection date: the date you posted the goods movements related to
exercise 8
Run the report clicking on .
Movements for material REGULAR are shown.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 299



Unit 5: Refinery: Silo Management, Refining, Internal Movements IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Understand reports for internal movements at the refinery on stages
ï Execute and explain report ñ material balance for Manufacturing Units
ï Execute and explain report ñ consumption of intermediates
ï Execute and explain report ñ materials blending
ï Execute and explain report ñ transfer movements to Distribution Plant

300 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Unit Summary

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain the differences between static and dynamic quantity conversions
ï List product types that can be handled by the Quantity Conversion Interface

(QCI)
ï Demonstrate movements inside the refinery
ï Explain the reasons for differences between physical inventory and book

inventory
ï Demonstrate how to record physical inventory in the ERP system
ï Demonstrate how to analyze differences between physical and book

inventory and how to record gain or loss postings
ï Understand the processing at the refinery
ï Execute material movements to post the manufacturing process in the system
ï Execute material transfers to post output from production site to product

storage area
ï Understand reports for internal movements at the refinery on stages
ï Execute and explain report ñ material balance for Manufacturing Units
ï Execute and explain report ñ consumption of intermediates
ï Execute and explain report ñ materials blending
ï Execute and explain report ñ transfer movements to Distribution Plant

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 301



Unit Summary IOG100

302 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 6
Exchange Agreements

Unit Overview
This unit will explain typical business process of Exchange Agreements which
are available with SAP for Oil&Gas.
The unit focuses on logistic operations in Exchange Agreements (IS-OIL-EXG)
and illustrates document flow to be generated under this functionality. You will
study major functions of this component such as exchange agreements and
exchange related purchasing and sales contract, call-offs from the contract and
deliveries (carry out purchase assignment, check or change a quantity schedule
and process deliveries). It also covers reporting activities on existing exchange
agreements such as:
ï Overview of your receipts and deliveries that are connected to the exchange

agreement
ï Principle of logical inventory and carry out a logical inventory adjustment
ï Netting sums receivables and payables within an exchange agreement

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Create exchange agreements and describe the purchase and sale business
process flow:

ï Create exchange related purchasing and sales contract(s)
ï Process receipts and deliveries against exchange contracts
ï Carry out reporting activities (logical inventory, exchange balance, netting

and exchange statements).

Unit Contents
Lesson: Exchange Operations ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .304

Exercise 10: Exchanges... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .325

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 303



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Lesson: Exchange Operations
Lesson Overview
The lesson will be about the process under Exchange Agreements (IS-OIL-EXG)
such as creating exchange agreement between VOIL DE and our partner for like
products. To do this you will need to create an exchange agreement header and
create and link purchase and sales contracts to that agreement. It will demonstrate
the issue and receipt of material with automatic creation and review of the resulting
financial postings. You will learn how the material postings will be calculated
using ìprice reference plantî functionality. It will show how to invoice our partner
and how to receive an invoice. It will also demonstrate how LIA (logical inventory
adjustment) has been expanded to include adjustments to logical inventory which
will settle our position by transferring our balance to another active agreement.
You will execute reports showing: the exchange balance report to get an overview
of your receipts and deliveries that are connected to the exchange agreement, the
principle of logical inventory and carry out a logical inventory adjustment, how
netting sums receivables and payables within an exchange agreement.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Create exchange agreements and describe the purchase and sale business

process flow:
ï Create exchange related purchasing and sales contract(s)
ï Process receipts and deliveries against exchange contracts
ï Carry out reporting activities (logical inventory, exchange balance, netting

and exchange statements).

Business Example
One of the wholesale Customers requires VOIL DE to deliver the finished products
to its remote location under the valid sale contract. An exchange agreement gives
VOIL DE the possibility of using the terminal or depot capacity of Exchange
Partner which is allocated close to the Customer in order to deliver products.
Through exchange contracts VOIL DE can deliver products from Exchange
Partner locations and thus to keep transportation costs down. VOIL DE is able to
buy and sell finished products under the exchange agreement.

304 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Exchange Agreements (finished products)
This component contains functions for managing exchange agreements between
companies in the oil and gas industry ñ the exchange of products at various
locations. An exchange agreement is made between two oil companies (exchange
partners), when the companies would like to exchange product at different
locations.
To support the management of exchange business transactions, you can:
ï Create an exchange agreement
ï Create quantity schedules for planning and monitoring material quantities
ï Balance differences in value of exchanged materials using fees
ï Settle claims and liabilities against one another (netting)
ï Exchange unlike products, and balance the logical inventory that results

(logical inventory adjustment)
ï Create exchange statements that reflect the current status of your exchange

activities in a specific period
ï Create additional evaluations with respect to your exchange activities (for

example, creating a list of all goods receipts and goods issues within an
exchange agreement).

Figure 117: Exchange Operations - Introduction

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 305



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Figure 118: Exchange Operations - Concept

An exchange agreement gives VOIL DE the possibility of using the terminal or
depot capacity of VOIL DE exchange partner in order to sell products. Through
exchange contracts VOIL DE can deliver products from exchange partner
locations.

Exchange Operations ñ Concept
Why do oil companies exchange?
ï To expand into marketing areas where a company does not have infrastructure
ï To exploit excess capacity where a company does have infrastructure
ï To minimize transportation costs.

306 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Figure 119: Exchange Operations Management

R/3 supports the linking of entitlements to ìliftî (obtain) a product from an
exchange partner (purchase agreement, receipt side) and entitlements of the
exchange partner to lift a product from the oil company (sales agreement, delivery
side) under an exchange agreement.
Within the oil industry, an exchange is an agreement between oil companies
to allow lifting of products at one time and one location in exchange for the
entitlement to lift a product at another time and location.
Usually oil companies do not invoice an exchange partner after each individual
movement against a particular exchange. Such exchange agreements may be
netted and settled periodically. Oil companies usually keep track of their exchange
balance.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 307



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Figure 120: Exchange Basics

Figure 121: Exchange Agreement Structure

An exchange agreement is an agreement between two oil companies for the
exchange of a product at different locations. In the SAP ERP System, a link exists
between customer and vendor master data records, because in the system, the
exchange partner is both the vendor and customer at the same time.

308 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

The exchange agreement consists of the exchange header and of the assigned
sales contracts and purchase contracts.

Exchange Agreement Structure
The exchange header data is made up of general information for each exchange
agreement, as well as the corresponding detail information.
The evergreen type determines how quantities are handled in contracts. With the
different evergreen types you can determine the total quantity that you or your
exchange partner can call-off, the quantity that you can call off per period, or
an unlimited call-off quantity.
You can choose between internal or external posting rules: With internal postings,
material, taxes, and/or fees are posted to internal accounts. With external posting,
material, any taxes, and/or fees are charged to the exchange partner.
By selecting netting, external postings are made but the open amounts are blocked
for collection purposes or for payment. At the end of a period, the receivables
and payables are compared and only the differential amount is calculated for
billing purposes.
Contracts can be assigned to the exchange agreement, which helps to manage
exchange deliveries and receipts.

Figure 122: Exchange Agreements

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 309



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Figure 123: Evergreen Contracts - Dates

Figure 124: Evergreen Contracts - Regular

310 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

There are different kinds of exchange agreements:
ï In a borrow/loan exchange, materials are only posted internally, they are not

invoiced to the partner. A logical inventory is created. Excise duties and
fees caused by material movements are generally invoiced. A borrow/loan
exchange is also known as a ìpureî exchange. It is mainly used in the United
States. Companies in the U.S. using borrow/loan exchanges usually keep
track of the exchange balances and only charge for fees. As a result, only
fees are settled.

ï In a buy/sell exchange, materials and taxes are invoiced. Although they
might be posted internally, fees are generally invoiced as well.

There are also evergreen contracts, which are long-term exchange contracts with
no fixed end date and no fixed quantity.

Evergreen Contracts ñ Dates
An Unlimited Evergreen Contract is created so that partners can lift as much
product as they require, that is, no quantity schedule is used. There is only a
start date and a closing date.

Evergreen Contracts ñ Regular
In the regular contract a quantity per period is defined, that is, a quantity schedule
must be used. Besides the start and end date there is a review date.

Figure 125: Exchange Deliveries

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 311



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Figure 126: Exchange Deliveries - Documents View

Figure 127: Exchange Scenario for Deliveries

The exchange delivery scenario takes place when your company delivers products
to its exchange partnerís customer.

312 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Exchange Deliveries ñ Documents View
The documents on this slide are created when processing the loan or sale of
product against your exchange contract.
The customer (exchange partner) fulfills the contract by placing orders from the
contract (call-offs or release orders). When you create a call-off, you refer to
the corresponding contract, and the system automatically updates the called-off
quantity in the contract.
The breakdown period is to be copied from the quantity schedule to the contract
call-off, depending upon the delivery data entered. Fees for the individual items
are also copied from the contract to the call-off.
A delivery is carried out with reference to a call-off, and is thus also linked to the
exchange agreement. The goods issue has to be posted.
The account postings for goods issues are:
Buy/Sell Agreement:

Credit: PHYSICAL INVENTORY ( - )
Debit: COST OF GOODS SOLD ( + )

Borrow/Loan Agreement:

Credit: PHYSICAL INVENTORY ( - )
Debit: LOGICAL INVENTORY ( + )

Depending on the type of outline agreement (thus depending on the exchange
type), the exchange partner may only be charged for fees and taxes, or may be
charged for other things. If netting is provided in the exchange agreement, the
invoice is blocked and offset in subsequent netting.
The account postings for billing are:
Buy/sell agreement:

Credit: REVENUE ñ Product ( - )

Credit: REVENUE ñ Fees ( - )

Debit: CUSTOMER ( + )

Borrow/Loan agreement:

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 313



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Credit: REVENUE ñ Fees ( - )

Debit: CUSTOMER ( + )

Exchange Scenario for Deliveries
A basic exchange scenario would be as follows: a customer of VOIL's exchange
partner receives material from VOIL's plant.
Call-offs are created based on the sales contract which has been assigned to the
exchange agreement. Call-offs are needed to reflect the physical goods flow and
the resulting exchange-related goods issues which are posted to the exchange
partnerís customer.
In order to depict the scenario in your ERP System, you create a call-off, delivery,
and an invoice. You could also place rush orders when your exchange partner's
customer receives the product immediately, or when you deliver the product to the
customer on the same day on which the order was made. The system automatically
creates a delivery for a rush order. However, the billing document is created later.

Figure 128: Exchange Receipts

314 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Figure 129: Exchange Receipts - Documents View

The exchange receipt scenario takes place when the company borrows or buys
products against an exchange agreement. You buy or borrow a product from your
partner, but it does not deliver it to your customer. This key figure expresses the
quantities processed for exchange receipts for a period (current month) in the
stockkeeping unit of measure. It is used in various reports to capture data about
the purchase side of each exchange, i.e. the quantity of the product which your
partner delivered to your customer.

Exchange Receipts ñ Documents View
The documents on this slide are created when borrowing or buying a product
against your exchange contract.
Call-offs are created with reference to the purchase contract. Data from the
exchange header is copied into the call-off (for example, the number of the
exchange agreement, netting-blocking indicator, etc.). As with the purchase
contract, that data is displayed on the details screen for each item. There is a
quantity schedule for each item; the breakdown is copied from the purchase
contract. The breakdown period in the quantity schedule is based on the delivery
date. The fees for the individual items are also copied from the purchase contract
to the call-off.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 315



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

When a goods receipt is posted, the system creates a material document and an
accounting document. In the material document, which serves as proof of a goods
movement, data from the exchange agreement is copied into the purchase order.
Parallel to the material document, the system creates an accounting document
which contains the accruals from the fee postings.
The account postings for goods receipts are:
Buy/sell agreement:

Credit: GR/IR ñ Product ( - )

Debit: PHYSICAL INVENTORY ( + )

Credit: GR/IR ñ Fees ( - )

Debit: EXCHANGE FEES ( + )

Borrow/loan agreement:

Credit: LOGICAL INVENTORY ( - )

Debit: PHYSICAL INVENTORY ( + )

Credit: GR/IR ñ Fees ( - )

Debit: EXCHANGE FEES ( + )

Invoice verification is carried out during invoice receipt based on the data
previously created during goods receipt. During goods receipt-related invoice
verification, each goods receipt is settled individually. However, open items
that still have to be settled can also be selected with reference to an exchange
agreement. You can settle goods receipts with Evaluated Receipt Settlement
(ERS) within exchange agreements directly, without having first received an
invoice. ERS automatically creates invoice verification documents according to
previously set criteria.
The account postings for invoice verification are:
Buy/sell agreement:

316 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Credit: VENDOR ( - )

Debit: GR/IR ñ Product ( + )

Debit: GR/IR ñ Fees ( + )

Borrow/loan agreement:

Credit: VENDOR ( - )

Debit: GR/IR Account ( + )

Figure 130: Purchase Assignments

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 317



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Figure 131: Purchase Assignment - Documents View

Another exchange scenario would be that a customer of VOIL receives material
from an exchange partner's plant.
When processing a purchase assignment, you assign a delivery quantity to a
purchase order quantity. Your customer sends you an order, but the ordered
material is to be delivered to your customer from one of your exchange partner's
locations. To do this, you send a purchase order to your exchange partner, which
details the material to be delivered to the customer.
When your exchange partner delivers the material to your customer, you create
a delivery and assign the delivery quantity to your purchase contract or your
purchase order.
The link between delivery and purchase order causes the system to automatically
post the goods receipt, as soon as you have posted the goods issue.
The system updates the quantity schedule in the following way:
ï When you create the delivery and assign the quantity to be delivered to

a purchase order (or to a purchase contract), the quantity to be delivered
appears as an intended quantity in the quantity schedule of the corresponding
item.

ï As soon as you post the goods issue (and the system automatically creates
the goods receipt for the purchase order), the delivered quantity is listed in
the quantity schedule as a goods receipt quantity.

318 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Purchase Assignment ñ Documents View
For a purchase assignment, you have to select the item within a delivery which you
want to assign to a purchase contract or call-off. Select purchase assignment tab.
It is possible to assign the sales order item to a purchase contract item or to a
purchase call-off item. As soon as the goods issue is posted, an automatic goods
receipt is carried out for the purchase order; or - if the sales order item is assigned
to a contract, a purchase call-off will be posted before an automatic goods receipt
is carried out.

Figure 132: Exchange Settlement

When a contract expires, it is possible to perform the settlement.
When netting has been selected, the system creates a link between the customer
account and the vendor account for a specific exchange partner. The items relevant
to netting in those accounts are then offset. The difference is then a single open
item, which is charged to the exchange partner or which has to be paid to the
exchange partner.
You can send the exchange partner an ìinvoiceî, i.e., a statement, so your partner
can check all the relevant quantities moved.
Reconciliation allows you to compare your data with that of your exchange partner
and discuss how to handle differences that have occurred.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 319



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Figure 133: Netting

Movement-based netting collects receivables and payables in an exchange and
offsets them against each other. Also, movements without financial documents
are included.
Goods movements that reference the exchange agreement are used as the selection
method for selecting the documents.
The system calculates the netting balance as a sum of the receivables and payables.
You either bill the balance to your exchange partner, or your company pays the
amount.
You can create an exchange statement (printout) from the movement-based netting
document, and you can send it to your exchange partner. Your exchange partner
can then check the exchange statement. If your exchange partner reports any
changes, you can still change the movement-based netting document, as long
as you have not created a batch-input session BTCI (Batch Communication
Interface). When the batch-input session is run, the accounts are cleared and
difference postings take place.
A ìBalance Calculation Indicatorî gives you the option of including balances for
base products which have no activity for the month.
For the printout, it is necessary that you maintain an address for your sales
organization.
Split movement-based netting allows separate netting documents for fees, material
value, and taxes to be created.

320 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Figure 134: Logical Inventory Adjustment

Figure 135: Exchange Balance

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 321



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Figure 136: Logical Inventory Adjustment - Example

When a contract expires, it is possible to adjust the exchange balance.
You determine if the imbalance between delivered and received material is to
be settled by:
ï An adjustment receipt and/or
ï An adjustment delivery and/or
ï A negotiated payment

Exchange Balance
When exchange balances are built up against ìpureî exchanges, it is usual to
value the assets and liabilities associated with the goods movements as if they
were actual inventory for financial accounting purposes. This means the logical
inventory for a material is a material quantity, and due to exchange movements that
took place it exists as payables or receivables with respect to the exchange partner.
The Logical Inventory is a quantity of product, and not accounts payable or
receivable. R/3 records and tracks the value of the inventory at the prevailing
inventory carrying price when the material movement was created.
If no ìown inventoryî is carried at a location, the receivable and payable volumes
can be valued at the current value at a ìreference plantî.
You can create an individual evaluation structure using the flexible analysis option
from the Logistics Information System.

322 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

You can list all material movements and logical inventory adjustment (LIA)
transactions which are assigned to an exchange agreement and correspond to the
selection criteria. The list is sorted according to:
ï Exchange partner
ï Number of the exchange agreement
ï Material
ï Plant
ï Month
The total amount of material movements and LIA transactions is displayed
for each level; the lifts and receipts are listed in two separate columns and the
difference between the two is listed in an additional column.
The system only updates the exchange balance when the goods receipts / goods
issues are exchange related.

Logical Inventory Adjustment ñ Example
The logical inventory adjustment transaction allows the oil company to adjust the
logical inventory it has recorded against an exchange partner.
It is possible to settle the difference (imbalance) between delivered and received
material by means of a payment. Open quantities can also be moved to another
exchange agreement, which has the effect that the items in the first exchange
agreement are settled and the exchange agreement can be concluded.
No physical movement is involved, but rather only a ìlogical inventory
movementî.
The LIA transaction allows the oil company to record the swap of the ownership
of a specified quantity of one product for the ownership of a specified quantity of
another product. Note that it does not necessarily have to be a different product.
When an LIA is carried out, logical inventory accounts and the exchange balance
are updated.
Account Postings
Delivery Adjustment:

Credit: EXG BALANCING ACCT ( - )

Debit: LOGICAL INVENTORY ( + )

Receipt Adjustment:

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 323



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Credit: LOGICAL INVENTORY ( - )

Debit: EXG BALANCING ACCT ( + )

Negotiated Payment ñ Payable:

Credit: VENDOR ( - )

Debit: EXG BALANCING ACCT ( + )

Negotiated Payment ñ Receivable:

Credit: EXG BALANCING ACCT ( - )

Debit: CUSTOMER ( + )

324 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Exercise 10: Exchanges
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Create exchange agreements
ï Explain posting rules, administrative data and control data.
ï Assign purchase and sales contracts to an exchange agreement
ï Complete the exchanges business flow with call-offs (ìliftsî) from purchase

and sales contracts.
ï Carry out invoice verification using evaluated receipt settlement, and create

a billing document using the billing due list
ï Use the exchange balance report to provide an overview of receipts and

deliveries that are linked to the exchange agreement.
ï Carry out the logical inventory adjustment
ï Create a movement-based netting document and check the output on the

screen

Business Example
An exchange contract gives VOIL DE (CC 1100) the possibility of using the
terminal or depot capacity of VOIL DE 's Exchange partner in order to sell
petroleum products. The other reason of this exchange contract is to keep
transportation costs down when VOIL DE delivers products from Exchange
partner locations to its remote Customers.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 325



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Task:
VOIL DE uses exchange agreements with an oil industry partner in order to
exchange products. VOIL DE uses exchange contracts to buy products from the
oil industry partner and to sell products to that partner. VOIL DE uses quantity
schedules for the planning and monitoring of material quantities. A customer of
Exchange partner requests product and VOIL DEís Exchange partner decides to
lift the product from VOIL DE's plant. In another case, VOIL DE lifts products
from the Exchange partnerís plant and delivers that product to its own customer.
VOIL DE has to check the exchange balance report in order to adjust differences
between lifts and receipts, and carries out a logical inventory adjustment (LIA).
VOIL DE does not invoice its Exchange partner after each individual movement,
but settles the exchange agreement periodically. VOIL DE wants to offset the
receivables and payables collected in the exchange agreements against each other.
VOIL DE can create a netting statement (printout) for the movements-based
netting document, and can send it to its exchange partner. VOIL DE's exchange
partner can then check the statement. If its exchange partner reports any changes
to VOIL DE, the movements-based netting document can still be changed, as long
as VOIL DE has not created a batch-input session. When the batch-input session
is run, the accounts are cleared and difference postings are carried out.
1. Set up an exchange agreement with your oil industry partner. Create and

assign sales and purchase contracts to the exchange agreement.
2. Deliver product to your exchange partner's customer.
3. Call-off a certain quantity of product from the purchase contract. Thus you

need to create a purchase order with reference to the purchase contract.
4. To run a purchase assignment scenario, in which a Customer is calling you to

order a specific quantity of product that is to be delivered from your exchange
partnerís location, you have to create an order and assign the subsequent
delivery to an existing purchase contract linked to an exchange agreement.

5. Use the billing due list to combine the documents to be billed. On the
purchase side, use evaluated receipt settlement (ERS) to settle the goods
receipts.

6. Use the system reporting tools to examine what has happened within your
exchange agreement so far. You can settle the difference between delivered
and received material with a delivery or receipt adjustment.You can also
settle financial differences with a negotiated payment.

7. Create a movements-based netting document, examine the netting proposal,
and check the screen output.

326 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Solution 10: Exchanges
Task:
VOIL DE uses exchange agreements with an oil industry partner in order to
exchange products. VOIL DE uses exchange contracts to buy products from the
oil industry partner and to sell products to that partner. VOIL DE uses quantity
schedules for the planning and monitoring of material quantities. A customer of
Exchange partner requests product and VOIL DEís Exchange partner decides to
lift the product from VOIL DE's plant. In another case, VOIL DE lifts products
from the Exchange partnerís plant and delivers that product to its own customer.
VOIL DE has to check the exchange balance report in order to adjust differences
between lifts and receipts, and carries out a logical inventory adjustment (LIA).
VOIL DE does not invoice its Exchange partner after each individual movement,
but settles the exchange agreement periodically. VOIL DE wants to offset the
receivables and payables collected in the exchange agreements against each other.
VOIL DE can create a netting statement (printout) for the movements-based
netting document, and can send it to its exchange partner. VOIL DE's exchange
partner can then check the statement. If its exchange partner reports any changes
to VOIL DE, the movements-based netting document can still be changed, as long
as VOIL DE has not created a batch-input session. When the batch-input session
is run, the accounts are cleared and difference postings are carried out.
1. Set up an exchange agreement with your oil industry partner. Create and

assign sales and purchase contracts to the exchange agreement.
a) In order to create an exchange agreement, you must check whether a

link between the vendor and the customer master record exists.
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Master Data→ Customer→
Display
In the Initial screen, enter:

Customer: 27100001

Choose Enter.
On the General Data screen, choose the Control data tab.
You can see the link to 400012
Go back and choose Logistics→ Exchanges→Master Data→ Vendor
→ Display
In the Initial screen, enter:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 327



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Vendor: 400012

In the General data section, select Control and choose Enter.
On the Control screen, you can see the link to 27100001

b) Create an exchange agreement (regular evergreen type) with your
partner.
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operations→ Exchange
agreements→ Create exchange agreement
In the Initial screen, enter:

Exchange type: Borrow/Loan regular
Exchange partner no.: 400012

Choose Header.
The Create Exchange Agreement: Header screen appears.
In the Posting rules section, the following values are already selected:

Material: Internal

This means that the material is posted to internal accounts and not
invoiced to the exchange partner.

Fees and Taxes: External

With external posting, any taxes or fees are charged to the exchange
partner.
In the Control data section, set the following values:

S/B product indicator: 1 Real plant valuation
S/B product check: 1 Single contract
QS breakdown: M Monthly
QS split: 3 Assign whole quantity to

every period
Netting cycle: Free for Payment

Continued on next page

328 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

The Apply fee check indicator is set, which means that at least one
fee has to be assigned for each sales contract and for each purchase
contract. This is checked when a contract is created.
The Netting active indicator is not set, which means that external
postings are carried out and the open amounts are not blocked for
collection purposes or for payment. Othervise the open amounts are
blocked for collection purposes or for payment and at the end of
a period, the receivables and payables are compared and only the
differential amount is calculated for billing purposes.
In the Administrative data section, enter:

Closing date: (The end of the year).

You could also enter a Review date, which means that a review of the
exchange agreement should be considered after that date. If it is a
regular evergreen exchange, the review date is used as the end date for
the quantity schedule, as long as no closing date is known.
Save the exchange agreement.

c) Create a sales contract for the exchange agreement:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operations→ Exchange
agreements→ Change exchange agreement

Note: You must use this path to assign the contract to the
exchange agreement.

In the Initial screen, enter:

Exchange number: (Exchange number from
previous step)

Choose Enter.
The Contract Assignments screen appears.
On the Sales contracts tab, choose Create.
Enter the following data:

Contract type: CQ (Quantity contract)
Sales organization: 1100 Sales Dept. VOil DE
Distribution channel: 13 Fuels
Division: 13 Fuels

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 329



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Choose Enter.
Customer number 27100001 is defaulted from the exchange agreement
header.
In the field PO number imput IOG100-SD-EXC-XX
In the Overview screen, enter the material and the target quantity:

Material: REGULAR
Target quantity: 50.000,00
Base product is defaulted: REGULAR

The unit of measure,M15, is defaulted when you choose Enter.
Do not save your data yet.
To assign the location (LOCN) and handling fees (HAND) to the sales
contract, select the item and choose Fees.
Enter the condition types HAND and LOCN in the CnTy field, and
choose Enter. The system displays the default values.
Go back to the Overview screen. Do not save your data yet.
To check the quantity schedule, select the item again and choose QS
(quantity schedule).
The entire quantity of 50.000,00 M15, which is the quantity in the base
unit of measure, is assigned to each period as a scheduled quantity.
Called-off quantities are zero.
Go back to the Overview screen and Save your quantity contract.

d) To create a purchase contract for the exchange agreement, on the
Contract Assignments screen choose the Purchase Contracts tab.
Choose Create.
The vendor is defaulted and cannot be changed manually because of
the assignment to the exchange agreement.
Enter the following data:

Agreement type: MK (Quantity contract)
Agreement date: (Todayís date)
Purchasing organization: 1101 Supply Europe

Continued on next page

330 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Purchasing group: 013 Fuels
Plant: 1105
Storage location: BULK

Choose Enter. On the Create Contract: Item Overview screen, enter
the material and the target quantity:

Material: REGULAR
Target quantity: 50.000,00
Base product No is defaulted: REGULAR

The unit of measureM15 is defaulted when you choose Enter.
Do not save your data yet.
Select the item and choose Fees.
Enter the condition types HAND and LOCN and choose Enter. The
system displays the default values.
Go back to the Overview screen.
To check the quantity schedule, select the item again and choose
Quantity schedule.
The entire quantity of 50.000,00 M15, which is the quantity in the base
unit of measure, is assigned to each period as the scheduled quantity.
Called-off and intended quantities are zero.
Go back to the Overview screen and Save your quantity contract.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 331



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

2. Deliver product to your exchange partner's customer.
a) To create a call-off with reference to the sales contract, proceed as

follows:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
deliveries→ Sales call-off→ Create sales call-off
In the Initial screen enter:

Order type: OR

Choose Create with reference to be able to create a sales order with
reference to the sales contract that you created before.
In the Create with Reference dialog box, select the Contract tab. Enter
the sales contract number from previous step and choose Copy.
In the Partner selection dialog box, select the ship-to party: 27100001
In the field PO number imput IOG100-SD-EXC-XX
Enter the call-off quantity:

Order quantity: 10.000,00 M15

Familiarize yourself with the data on the overview screen, and Save
the call-off.

b) Create the delivery and the subsequent goods issue for the call-off.
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operations→ Exchange
deliveries→ Delivery→ Create delivery
Enter the following data:

Shipping point: 1102
Selection date: (Todayís date)
Base product No is defaulted: (Order number from previous

step)

Choose Enter.
Select the item on the Overview screen and go to Picking tab.
On the Picking tab, enter the storage location BULK (if it is not already
defaulted.) and Pick/stock quantity 10.000,000 M15
Choose Post goods issue.

Continued on next page

332 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

3. Call-off a certain quantity of product from the purchase contract. Thus you
need to create a purchase order with reference to the purchase contract.
a) Create a purchase order with reference to the purchase contract.

Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
receipts→ Purchase call-off Æ→ Create purchase call-off

Order type: NB Standard PO

At the Item overview level, scroll over to column Outline agreement
and enter the purchase contract number from previous step.
Choose Enter.
The entries are defaulted.
Now enter the purchase order quantity:

PO quantity: 10.000,00 M15

Choose Enter and save the purchase order
b) To create the goods receipt for the purchase order from previous step,

proceed as follows:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
receipts→ Goods receipt→ Create/display goods receipt
Enter:

Purchase order: (PO number)

Choose Enter. The values are defaulted from the purchase order.
Flag the items as OK, and save the goods receipt.
(Note: Choose Enter for each warning message.)

4. To run a purchase assignment scenario, in which a Customer is calling you to
order a specific quantity of product that is to be delivered from your exchange
partnerís location, you have to create an order and assign the subsequent
delivery to an existing purchase contract linked to an exchange agreement.
a) Create a sales order for own Customer to whom product is to be

delivered from your Exchange partnerís location.
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
deliveries→ Sales call-off→ Create sales call-off
On the Initial screen, enter:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 333



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Order type: OR

Sales organization: 1100 Sales Dept. VOil DE
Distribution channel: 30 Distr Chann Distrib
Division: 13 Fuels

Choose Enter.
On the Overview screen, enter:

Ship-to party: 340000

Material: REGULAR Sales Dept. VOil
DE

Quantity: 10.000,00 M15
Plant: 1105 (change the plant from

defaulted)

Choose Enter and verify the data defaulted to material item.
Save the order.

b) Create the delivery for the sales order:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
deliveries→ Delivery→ Create delivery

Shipping point: 1105 Exchange & Purchase North

Selection date: (Today's date)
Order: (Order number from previous

step)

Choose Enter, and then double-click the item.
On the Picking tab, enter the storage location BULK.
On the Purchase assignment tab, enter:

Continued on next page

334 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Purchase document: (Contract number from step
with exchange agreement)

Item: 10
Assigned quantity: 10.000,00 M15

Choose Enter for each warning and save the delivery, but do not post
a goods issue.

c) Display the quantity schedule for the purchase contract:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
agreements→ Display exchange agreement
Enter the exchange agreement number and choose Enter.
On the Purchase Contracts tab, select the purchase contract and then
choose Edit→ Display document.
Select the item and choose Quantity Schedule (QS). As you will see,
the delivery quantity from previous step is assigned as an intended
quantity (that is, it is not yet called off) within the quantity schedule
of the assigned purchase contract. The value in the Unit field is the
base unit of measure (M15).
Choose System→ Create session
In the new session, choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange
Operations→ Exchange deliveries→ Delivery→ Change delivery
The system defaults the delivery from previous step.
Choose Enter.
Select the item on the Overview screen and go to Picking tab.
On the Picking tab, enter the storage location BULK (if it is not already
defaulted.) and Pick/stock quantity 10.000,000 M15
Choose Post goods issue.
Go back to your other session. On the Purchasing Contract Quantity
Schedule screen, choose Refresh. The previously intended quantity
is now added to the called-off quantity. The system automatically
posted an exchange related purchase order and goods receipt for the
same volume as for the goods issue that you posted for the delivery to
the third party customer.
Choose Environment→ Document flow contract

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 335



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

You can view the purchase order that the system has automatically
posted.

Note: The system handles the goods flow as if it were a ìrealî
goods flow. Bear in mind that it is actually a ìlogicalî goods
flow and the product was delivered from your exchange
partnerís location.

d) Check the goods receipt, which was posted automatically.
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operations→ Exchange
receipts→ Goods receipt→ Create/display goods receipt
Select Display as the action to be carried out.
Material document is defaulted as the reference document for the
MIGO transaction.
If the document number is not defaulted, double-click your material
document number from the list of documents in the Overview on the
left-hand side of the screen.
Movement type 101 was used to post the goods receipt.

5. Use the billing due list to combine the documents to be billed. On the
purchase side, use evaluated receipt settlement (ERS) to settle the goods
receipts.
a) To create a billing document using the billing due list, proceed as

follows:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
deliveries→ Billing→ Billing due list
Enter the following data:

Billing date to: (Today's date)

Sold-to party: 27100001
Delivery related:

On the Options tab, enter:

Exchange number: (Exchange number)

Choose Display billing list.

Continued on next page

336 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Save the billing due list. The system displays a log for the billing run,
which contains the information that one billing document was created.
Check the conditions within the invoice:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operations→ Exchange
deliveries→ Billing→ Display billing document
The billing document that was just created will be defaulted. Choose
Enter.
Select the item, and choose Goto→ Item→ Item conditions.
Double-click the gross price. In the Control Data view, you can see
that this condition is set to statistical because the material value is only
posted internally within a borrow/loan exchange agreement.
Choosing the condition for the Fee total sum record shows that this
condition is not set to statistical because your exchange partner is
charged for fees

b) Settle the goods receipts with the evaluated receipt settlement:
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Exchange
receipts→ Logistics invoice verification→ Execute ERS
Enter the following data:

Vendor: 400012

Exchange agreement number: (Exchange number)
Document selection: 2 (Document selection per

purchase order)
Test run: [ ]

Choose Execute.
The system posted two invoiced transactions. One was the purchase
call-off that you created in exercise. The other was the automatically
generated purchase call-off from the purchase assignment scenario
from the exercise.

6. Use the system reporting tools to examine what has happened within your
exchange agreement so far. You can settle the difference between delivered
and received material with a delivery or receipt adjustment.You can also
settle financial differences with a negotiated payment.
a) Display the exchange balance report.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 337



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange Operations→ Reporting
→ Exchange balance
Enter the following data:

Application: 03 (Inventory controlling)

Evaluation structure: ZFEXCHBL (Exchange
balance)

Evaluation: EXGB (Exchange balance report)

Choose Execute.
Enter:

Exchange number: (Exchange number)

Choose Execute again.
In the right column of the exchange balance report, you can see the
exchange balance, which is the difference between liftings and receipts.
Note that you received more product than you delivered.
Record the exchange balance: _______________.
You do not need to save an extract from the exchange balance.

b) Carry out a logical inventory adjustment with a delivery adjustment,
with the positive value of the exchange balance quantity from previous
step, and book a negotiated payment.

Note: The logical inventory is a material quantity that exists
as payable or receivable with respect to the exchange partner,
as a result of exchange movements that have taken place.
Therefore, it describes the balance of material quantities owed
or owing against a borrow/loan exchange. Logical inventory
can be settled using logical inventory adjustment (LIA), in
which settlement is in material quantities.

Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operations→ Logical
inventory adjustments→ Create LIA
Enter the following data:

Continued on next page

338 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

Exchange partner number: 03 (Inventory controlling)

LIA document type: LIA - Exg # required

In the Balance adjustments section, enter:

Type: Delivery

Company code: 1100
Exchange number: (Exchange number)
Plant: 1102
Base product: REGULAR
Quantity: (Exg. balance (lifts-receipts)

from step a); positive value
Unit of measure: M15
Text: To settle exchange balance.

Note that the entry of a material with a negative quantity within the
book receipt transaction subtracts the material quantity from the logical
receipt inventory.
In the Negotiated payment section, enter the following data:

Type: Payable

Company code: 1100
Exchange number: (Exchange agreement)
Amount: 10.000,00
Currency: EUR
Purchase organization: 1101
Plant: 1102

Save the LIA document.
After carrying out the logical inventory adjustment, check the
accounting documents:
Choose LIA→ Display
On the subsequent screen, choose Acctg. doc.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 339



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Check the exchange balance by repeating step a. You can now see
that the exchange balance is zero.

7. Create a movements-based netting document, examine the netting proposal,
and check the screen output.
a) Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operationsÆ→ Netting

→ Movements based netting→ Create netting document
Enter the following data:

Exchange partner number: 400012

Netting document type: OINF (Movm. Netting - Fees)
Sales organization: 1100
Distribution channel: 10
Division: 13

Choose Enter.
On the Selection criteria screen, enter:

Currency: EUR

Unit of measure M15
From exchange number (Exchange number)
From month: (January, current year)
To month: (Current month and year)

Leave the Indicators set as defaulted:

Logical inventory adjustment
included:
Pure financial adjustment
included:
Movement without financials:
Balance indicator:

Choose Netting proposal and examine all the items: The system
defaults two receipts, one delivery and one book receipt. Go back and
save the netting document (do not choose Save and create BTCI).

Continued on next page

340 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Exchange Operations

You ca also Display the exchange statement summary.
Choose Logistics→ Exchanges→ Exchange operations→ Netting→
Movements based netting→ Display netting document
Enter the netting document number from this step (do not choose Enter).
Choose Netting document→ Issue output to screen
Select the exchange statement summary report (NTS1) and choose
Execute.
Confirm the subsequent dialog box.
You can repeat the steps above to select the detail activity report
(NTD1). This provides more detailed information on your exchange
agreement. Within the summary report, you can view the summarized
receipt and delivery volumes, and the corresponding financial amount.
The detail activity report shows the individual movements and
corresponding quantities.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 341



Unit 6: Exchange Agreements IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Create exchange agreements and describe the purchase and sale business

process flow:
ï Create exchange related purchasing and sales contract(s)
ï Process receipts and deliveries against exchange contracts
ï Carry out reporting activities (logical inventory, exchange balance, netting

and exchange statements).

342 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Unit Summary

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Create exchange agreements and describe the purchase and sale business

process flow:
ï Create exchange related purchasing and sales contract(s)
ï Process receipts and deliveries against exchange contracts
ï Carry out reporting activities (logical inventory, exchange balance, netting

and exchange statements).

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 343



Unit Summary IOG100

344 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 7
Secondary Distribution

Unit Overview
The key processes of transportation within Secondary Distribution (finished
products) in SAP for Oil&Gas reflect the key steps you need to take during the
transportation process. Within each of these key processes are functions that have
been specifically tailored for the oil and gas industry.
Transportation is an essential element in the logistics chain. It affects both
incoming and outgoing goods. Effective transportation planning and processing
ensure that shipments are dispatched without delay and arrive on schedule.
Transportation costs play an essential role in the calculation of the price of a
product. It is important to keep these transportation costs to a minimum so that
the price of a product remains competitive. Efficient transportation planning and
processing helps to keep these costs down.
These transportation functions can handle planning and processing for both
inbound and outbound shipments. You can control and monitor the entire
transportation process from the planning stage to goods issue at your shipping
point (for outbound shipments) or vendor location (for inbound shipments),
through to goods receipt at the customer location or your plant.
Other available functions include: shipment costs calculation and settlement
with the service agent, transfer to accounting, credit memo creation and invoice
verification.
The vehicle definition and compartment planning functions are designed to meet
your needs in managing the shipment of large volumes of bulk materials. The
transportation and distribution capabilities work seamlessly with functions in SAP
for Oil&Gas for inventory management of hydrocarbon products, allowing you to
handle changes in the quantity of oil material due to variations in ambient pressure
and temperature. This ensures that the most accurate quantity of a product is
always used throughout the shipment process.

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Explain how bulk shipments are integrated within the supply chain and
explain the in-transit stock concept

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 345



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

ï Create the different document types that can be assigned to a bulk shipment
for purchases, sales and transfers in the SAP for Oil&Gas

ï Create a vehicle for a bulk shipment, distinguish the different kinds of meters
for loading and discharging a vehicle, describe which kinds of compatibilities
can be set up for processing a bulk shipment

ï Explain the use of routes and service providers within bulk shipments, assign
routes and service providers to a bulk shipment, assign the document items
of the underlying documents to the stages of a route

ï Process bulk shipments: schedule a bulk shipment, load a simple bulk
shipment, deliver a simple bulk shipment and post a loss during delivery
confirmation, analyze the document flow within a bulk shipment

ï Create a shipment cost document, explain how costs are calculated, settle
costs with a service provider, and invoice costs to customers.

Unit Contents
Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .347

Exercise 11: Transportation Processing ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .381

346 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain typical business process of Secondary Distribution
(finished products) which are available with SAP for Oil&Gas.
The lesson focuses on logistic operations in Bulk Transportation and Shipment
Costing (IS-OIL-TD) and illustrates document flow to be generated under Bulk
Shipment Document. You will study major functions of this component such as
master data and in-transit stock concept, bulk shipment scheduling, bulk shipment
processing, shipment costing and reporting.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Explain how bulk shipments are integrated within the supply chain and

explain the in-transit stock concept
ï Create the different document types that can be assigned to a bulk shipment

for purchases, sales and transfers in the SAP for Oil&Gas
ï Create a vehicle for a bulk shipment, distinguish the different kinds of meters

for loading and discharging a vehicle, describe which kinds of compatibilities
can be set up for processing a bulk shipment

ï Explain the use of routes and service providers within bulk shipments, assign
routes and service providers to a bulk shipment, assign the document items
of the underlying documents to the stages of a route

ï Process bulk shipments: schedule a bulk shipment, load a simple bulk
shipment, deliver a simple bulk shipment and post a loss during delivery
confirmation, analyze the document flow within a bulk shipment

ï Create a shipment cost document, explain how costs are calculated, settle
costs with a service provider, and invoice costs to customers.

Business Example
VOIL DE delivers products to customers. External service agents are
commissioned to ship the materials, but the company is responsible for
organization and execution. VOIL DE organizes oil shipments by itself and
needs to record the costs for service providers like carrier, insurance, harbour
fees, agents, and so on.
In order that materials can be shipped as efficiently as possible, purchases,
deliveries, and transfers are combined where the points of departure, in-transit
locations and destinations match. Depending on the route, loading and discharge
points, distance, quantities etc. the shipment costs for the shipments are calculated.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 347



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

VOIL DE calculates and settles shipment costs with the various service agents
after the bulk shipment has been fully processed. The system automatically
calculates prices for shipment costs. Afterwards, the costs are transferred to
financial accounting (FI) and controlling (CO). The costs are settled by paying the
invoice. The costs of transportation are invoiced to VOIL DE's customers.

Secondary Distribution (finished products)
Transportation is an essential element in the logistics chain. It affects both
incoming and outgoing goods. Effective transportation planning and processing
ensure that shipments are dispatched without delay and arrive on schedule.
Transportation costs play an essential role in the calculation of the price of a
product. It is important to keep these transportation costs to a minimum so that
the price of a product remains competitive. Efficient transportation planning and
processing helps to keep these costs down.

Figure 137: Secondary Distribution (finished products)

The Hydrocarbon Products Transportation scenario supports oil and gas companies
to plan and execute bulk shipments in a timely and accurate manner at the
lowest possible cost. The scheduling and execution capabilities for loading and
unloading bulk shipments provide a consistent framework for processing and
tracking shipment of high volumes of bulk material as well as the handling of
changes that frequently occur in the oil and gas secondary distribution business.
The scenario supports freight costs calculation for bulk shipments with evaluated
receipt settlement for invoice processing with the carrier.

348 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Secondary Distribution (finished products)
You can now carry out transportation planning and shipment completion using
a new organizational unit, the transportation planning point. Basically, the
transportation planning point consists of a group of employees responsible
for organizing transportation activities. Each shipment is assigned to a
specific transportation planning point for transportation planning and shipment
completion. You must define the various transportation planning points used in
your organization in Customizing for Corporate Structure before they can be
used to perform transportation functions. You can define this organizational unit
according to your companyís needs, for example, according to geographical
location or mode of transport.
The transportation planning point is assigned to a company code, but is otherwise
independent of other organizational units.

Figure 138: Organizational Elements in Transportation

It is not necessary to assign the transportation planning point to a company code
for transportation planning purposes. However, company code assignment is
necessary for shipment costing and settlement. Internal offsetting of costs between
company codes (one company code takes care of transportation processing for all
the firmís company codes, for example) is presently not available. These must be
manually entered in the financial accounting ledgers.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 349



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Bulk Transportation Processing (IS-OIL-TD)
Transportation is an essential part of the oil and gas supply chain. The bulk
shipping document is the central element of transportation planning and
shipment completion. It contains all the information necessary for carrying
out transportation. The bulk shipment combines inbound deliveries, outbound
deliveries (shipping notifications) and transfers with matching points of departure,
in-transit locations, and destinations. Effective transportation processing is
required so that materials are shipped on time and are received on schedule at the
destination. The IS-OIL-TD bulk transportation application component allows
you to keep track of the in-transit stock during a specific transportation run.

Figure 139: Bulk Transportation Processing (IS-OIL-TD)

For example, you use the individual shipment document to plan and process the
transportation of goods from one location to another. You use the collective
shipment to move goods from one or more points of departure to one or more
destinations. Separate document types deal with inbound and outbound shipments.

350 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Bulk Shipment ñ Document Assignment
The Document Overview screen in TD bulk shipment is used to assign underlying
documents to a shipment. The Transportation and Distribution (TD) bulk shipment
component supports inbound purchases, outbound sales, and product transfers,
and is integrated with the relevant process flows. The underlying documents that
can be assigned to and processed within a bulk shipment are:
ï Outbound deliveries
ï Reservations
ï Transfer deliveries
ï Inbound deliveries
A bulk shipment requires at least one document assigned. Possible documents
are delivery (inbound, outbound, and transfer), and reservations. The document
selection report can help to find the documents number. A document has to be
load or discharge relevant. Load and discharge relevance at the same time is
also supported. The document type determines how the system processes the
underlying document. When assigning documents to a shipment, it is necessary to
select one of the following document types:
ï D ñ Delivery (Outbound Delivery)
ï R ñ Reservation
ï S ñ Shipping notification (Inbound Delivery)

Figure 140: Bulk Shipment - Document Assignment

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 351



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

During scheduling, documents are assigned to a shipment as load or discharge
relevant. For example if you mark a document as relevant to loading, the system
proposes the product and quantities from the document during the Loading
Confirmation process. If you mark the document as relevant to discharge, then the
product and quantities from the underlying document are proposed in the Delivery
Confirmation process. At least one of the indicators must be selected when the
document is assigned, or you can also select both. Alternatively, a document
selection routine can be used during scheduling to find documents for assignment
to a shipment. The document selection routine generates a list of documents that
meet the selection criteria you specified. You can select documents from this list
for assignment to the shipment.

Stock-In-Transit concept
You use intransit plant or storage locations to represent product which is being
transported on a vehicle as part of a bulk shipment. By defining intransit plant or
storage locations, you can manage and control stock after it has left the loading
plant and while intransit.
Intransit Storage Location
During loading, the product is transferred from the loading plant to the intransit
storage location. From that point on and until the delivery is confirmed, the control
and ownership of the material remains with the delivering plant. Subsequent
transactions in IS-OIL-TD that involve a shipment result the intransit storage
location being updated. As a result, you can track product while intransit and
account for gains or losses that occur between loading confirmation and delivery
confirmation.
Intransit Plant
When shipping large quantities of product over long distances such as in pipeline
and marine shipments, it can be necessary to maintain a segregated overview of
the intransit stock. This can be done by representing the vehicle as a separate
plant, known as an intransit plant. It is possible to allocate all vehicles to a single
intransit plant or, alternatively, to set up a separate intransit plant for each vehicle.
The intransit plant can consist of multiple storage locations for product tracking
purposes as it moves along its route. The allocation of the intransit plant is
specified in the underlying documents that are assigned to the bulk shipment.
You can define how the system is to determine the intransit storage location for
a bulk shipment. For example, you can determine that the system is to use the
location entered in the outbound delivery, reservation, or stock transfer order as
the intransit storage location for the shipment.

352 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Figure 141: Stock-In-Transit concept

Use of Intransit Storage Location in Sales Cycle
In the standard document flow for sales in Sales and Distribution (SD), stock
movements take place with reference to an outbound delivery through the
generation of a goods issue document. In this case, the customer takes ownership
of the stock as soon as it leaves the delivering plant, on execution of the goods
issue.
To track the stock at the point after leaving the delivering plant and prior to
arrival at the customer or receiving plant, IS-OIL-TD introduces the concept of
the intransit plant or storage location. In this case a transfer is used to move the
stock from the delivering plant to the vehicle during load confirmation. The stock
loaded on the vehicle then exists in the intransit plant or storage location. This
can be shown through the Stock Overview report. As a result, you can track
product while intransit and account for gains or losses that occur between loading
confirmation and delivery confirmation.

Transportation and Distribution Integration
The Transportation and Distribution (TD) component covers the logistics activities
related to:
ï Receipt of purchased product from a vendor
ï Transfer of product between two company-owned locations
ï Delivery of product from a delivering plant to a customer

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 353



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

These activities are carried out across the processes of scheduling, load
confirmation, and delivery confirmation.
Inbound shipments are an integral part of the process chain in purchasing and
are processed based on inbound deliveries (shipping notifications). The basis of
the purchasing process is the purchase order. The subsequent document is the
shipping notification, which is used by the vendor to confirm a delivery. The
shipping notification is the basis for creating inbound shipments, that is, the
shipment of the delivery from the vendor to the companyís plant. A goods receipt
is posted at load confirmation for the shipment, confirming the receipt of material
to an in-transit location. Invoice verification completes the purchasing process.

Figure 142: Transportation and Distribution Integration

Transfer shipments can also be used for stock transfers between plants or storage
locations. The reservation document is the basis for creating transfer shipments
between two plants within a company.
A material document is created when loading or delivery of the shipment is
confirmed. This document confirms the posting of material from an issuing
location to a receiving location.
Transfer shipments can also be carried out on the basis of stock transport orders.
Deliveries are created from stock transport orders using the delivery due list.
These deliveries can be assigned to a bulk shipment. The ERP system posts goods
issue and goods receips documents during shipment processing.

354 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Outbound shipments are part of the sales and distribution process and are
processed as deliveries. The basis of the sales and distribution process is the
sales order. The subsequent document is the outbound delivery that documents
the shipping of goods. The delivery document is the basis of creating outbound
shipments from the companyís plant to the customer. A material document is
created at loading for the shipment. This document confirms the posting of
material to in-transit stock. A goods issue is posted at delivery confirmation for
the shipment. Creation of the invoice completes the sales process.

Means of Transportation, Vehicle
A vehicle is any means by which product is transported from one location to
another. Driver master data enables driver details, such as shift period or driver
licenses to be stored in the system for information purposes within the shipment.
Drivers can be assigned to vehicles during the bulk transportation scheduling
process.
A one to many relationship exists between a vehicle and transport units. For
example, a truck can be created with a prime mover and several trailers. There
is also a one to many relationship between transport units and vehicles, in that a
transport unit can be assigned to several vehicles. Validation checks ensure that a
transport unit is not scheduled to more than one vehicle in the same shipment.
Transport units consist of none, one, or more compartments. The compartments
represent the physical storage tanks of a particular transport unit. During
scheduling and loading, product is scheduled and loaded according to the attributes
and capacity of each compartment. Therefore, each compartment requires
independent attributes to be defined, such as minimum and maximum volumes.
A weight restriction can be defined on the transport unit level.
None, one, or many vehicle meters can be assigned to compartments. Vehicle
meters are used during loading and delivery confirmation in bulk transportation
and accurately measure the quantity of product loaded or delivered.
The same concept is applicable for all kinds of transport systems like pipelines,
marine vessels, and trains.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 355



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 143: Vehicle Concept and Driver Concept

Figure 144: Vehicle structure

The Driver master data record stores driver details, such as their shift period or
drivers licenses in the system. You can assign drivers to vehicles during the
scheduling process of Bulk Transportation and Distribution. Driver master data
stores the driverís last name and first name, together with an external personnel

356 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

number. The external personnel number is not linked to the Human Resources
(SAP ERP Human Capital Management) application component, and is designed
primarily as an alternative method for identifying drivers.
Information about the types of licenses held by the driver is stored in driver master
data record. You can also enter the dates within which the licenses are valid. The
license types are defined in Customizing, and belong to the same pool of licenses
which are assigned to vehicles.
You can enter information relating to the shifts worked by the driver, together with
the periods for which the shifts are valid. The driver shift information can be used
during scheduling, where a vehicle can be scheduled for a particular shift. A shift
rota is created for the driver in Customizing for IS Oil & Gas (Downstream).

Vehicle operational characteristics
There are two kinds of meters: rack meters and vehicle meters.
ï Rack meter master data stores the attributes of meters used during the

loading or delivery transaction. Rack meters have assignments to both
storage locations and materials. Functionality exists to flush, recalibrate, and
record end readings for rack meters. These readings are shown in a meter
reconciliation report.

ï Vehicle meter master data is used to maintain vehicle meter attributes in the
system. Meters are assigned to compartments within transport units and are
then used to record loaded or delivered quantities.

Characteristics of the meter such as the unit of measure for the meter, number of
digits on the meter, and an equipment number (linked to the plant maintenance
system) are stored. The conversion factor which converts the quantity entered
into the actual quantity is also stored. The start reading of the meter, as it is first
installed, may be recorded to support meter reconciliation. The date and time of
the last meter reconciliation is also recorded in the meter master record.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 357



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 145: Vehicle operational characteristics

Compatibility checking ensures that product is compatible with the compartment to
which it is assigned, and that vehicles are compatible with customer requirements.
The characteristics of the products, compartments, vehicles, and customers are
represented in the system using compatibility indicators. These compatibility
indicators are grouped into compatibility groups. If desired, the compatibility
checking function can be turned off.
The material master contains a product/compartment compatibility field used to
assign compatibility groups to products. It is located in the shipping section of
the sales/plant view of the material master. Indicators within the assigned product
group must correspond to the indicator group assigned to the compartment.
The customer master record contains a vehicle/customer compatibility field used to
assign compatibility groups to customers. This field is located in the shipping view
of the customer master record. The indicators within the assigned customer group
determine the attributes required in order for the assigned vehicle to be compatible.
Example: A customer needs a truck with a specific logo and a long hose to unload
the product. Since the customer requires this, and the supplier's vehicle has to
meet these requirements, and therefore the attributes must be compatible.

Vehicle and material movements
External Movements

358 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Load confirmation: the process of load confirmation records the actual quantities
and products loaded for a particular shipment.
Several different processes occur within the load confirmation step, the most
important being the entry of actual loaded quantities. Quantities in scheduling are
planned quantities and are proposed at the load confirmation stage. The planned
quantities and the quantity of the products actually loaded may have changed. You
can enter these quantities in the quantity field, or you can enter readings from
Vehicle Meters or Rack Meters. In cases where product had been previously left
on the vehicle, you can record these quantities in the shipment as prior-to-load
quantities.
The concept of intransit stock is central to the loading process. A goods movement
occurs when the product is moved into the intransit plant or storage location, at
which point Quantity Conversion Interface (QCI) parameters can be calculated
and stored. In addition, any excise duty postings which are a consequence of the
goods movement are also performed.
Delivery confirmation: the delivery confirmation process is used to confirm the
delivery of actual quantities in a bulk shipment.
Delivery confirmation is the final step in processing bulk shipments. It enables
you to enter the final quantities delivered and to process the differences between
quantities delivered and loaded. Several options exist for processing product
that has been loaded but not delivered.
Delivery confirmation must be completed for each vehicle in the shipment. The
vehicles in the shipment each have an individual status, however, it is not until
the shipment has a Shipment Status of 6 that shipment processing is complete
and the final postings are made. Delivery confirmation is also a prerequisite for
Shipment Costing.
The delivery confirmation process includes functions for handling unplanned
deliveries, and several options for dealing with undelivered materials. You can
enter delivered quantities manually or by using vehicle meters during delivery
confirmation.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 359



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 146: Vehicle and material movements

Internal Movements
Corrections at Loading and Delivery Confirmation: During the loading
confirmation process it is possible to correct quantities for shipments that have
been completely confirmed (Shipment Status 6). If you change the quantities for
a shipment that has already been completely confirmed, the system carries out
correction postings. What type of posting the system carries out, depends on the
underlying document.
Prior-to-Load Quantities: With the prior-to-load quantity, you can include a
quantity left on the vehicle from a previous shipment in the next shipment using
the same vehicle.
For example, in the delivery confirmation of a previous shipment you may
have entered a left-on-vehicle quantity. For the next shipment using that same
product and compartment, the system proposes that left-on-vehicle quantity as the
prior-to-load quantity during loading.
In the Load Bulk screen, when you select Get prior to load the the system displays
for each transport unit in the shipment both the previous shipment number and any
left-on-vehicle quantity entered during delivery confirmation.
If the product cannot be delivered to the selected destination, several options exist
in the delivery confirmation process to determine where the product should go.

360 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Left-on-Vehicle Quantities: Product can be left on the vehicle in the compartment
into which it was loaded. If product is left on a vehicle, the system proposes a
prior-to-load quantity during loading for the next shipment using the same vehicle.
The prior-to-load quantity can be used to form part of the new shipment.
Return Quantities: Product can be returned to the delivering plant if it is not
to be delivered to the intended destination. This process is carried out at the
compartment level. Product can be returned either to the delivering plant or
another plant at which the material is held. The return date and time are then
used in the material movement posting.
Rebrand: You can rebrand product upon its return to the delivering plant. This
allows product which had been rebranded during loading to be returned to the
correct tank within the delivering plant.
Unplanned Rebrands: Unplanned rebrands are used to cover cases where the
underlying document and schedule are for one product, but at the loading
confirmation stage there is insufficient product. At this point product can be
substituted. The substitution product must fulfill customer requirements just as
the first product.The scheduled product can be overwritten (rebranded) in the
Rebrand/Load bulk detail screen. Rebranding results in a material-to-material
transfer and the necessary accounting adjustments.
Planned Rebrands: Planned rebrands refer to any form of rebrand that has been
planned in advance, such as in the delivery document. Planned rebrands include
bill of materials handling within shipment processing. In this case, the main item
for which the delivery has been created is scheduled. The sub-items are then
loading confirmed in the Rebrand/lLoad bulk detail screen, enabling a variation
in the loaded quantity from that which was scheduled. Finally, the main item
is delivery confirmed.
Movement on Board
You can change information about loaded stock for shipments with a shipment
status is partially loaded. To make these changes during the delivery confirmation
process, choose Movement on board on the Create/Change Delivery Confirmation
screen. You can make the following changes to the loaded shipment: Vehicle,
Compartment, In-transit plant, In-transit storage location, Batch, Material,
Quantity It is also possible to post gains/losses during shipment and change tax
status of in-transit stock.
Prerequisites:
Before you make any changes or corrections, at least one material must have
status load confirmed. The vehicle must not have status delivery confirmed. The
shipment status must be 5 or less. All quantities you entered must be confirmed. It
is not sufficient when the loading/delivery confirmation is only saved.
Vehicle Reconciliation

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 361



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

A report can be used to reconcile left-on-vehicle and prior-to-load quantities for
a specified period of time. The report displays quantities which have been left
on the vehicle and not assigned to any subsequent shipments during loading
confirmation. You can select the vehicle to be reconciled by entering the necessary
selection criteria in the TD Vehicle reconciliation screen.

Shipment Scheduling
You can record planning, loading, and delivery information in the bulk shipment
document. The aim of transportation planning is to carry out all necessary
organizational tasks before the goods are actually shipped.
After shipment has been loaded, but before shipment has been delivered, the
materials are ìin-transit.î You can use the IS-OIL-TD to keep track of your
in-transit stock.

Figure 147: Shipment Planning, Loading and Delivery

Within the shipment header, it is possible to set up planned dates and times for
the start and end of scheduling, loading, and delivery confirmation. When the
shipment is processed and the details for loading and discharge are recorded,
the actual dates and times are recorded.

Planning Tasks
During scheduling, one or more vehicles can be assigned to the bulk shipment.
The vehicle master data can be changed at that time for a particular shipment. It is
also possible to assign drivers to vehicles at that stage.

362 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Partner (for example, service agent) details are maintained in the shipment to
calculate shipment costs.
During scheduling, it is necessary to assign underlying documents to a shipment.
The materials from the loading documents can then be assigned to compartments
of the vehicles. During compartment planning, compatibility checking is carried
out. It is possible to create shipment texts which can be accessed throughout the
bulk shipment process.
As a shipment typically is handled by a number of different people, a text
processing function can be used for inter-departmental communications regarding
the handling of the shipment.
Shipment stages are used to record the geographical aspects of a shipment. After a
route has been assigned to a vehicle and compartment planning has been carried
out, it is possible to assign underlying documents to one or more stages within
a route.
During scheduling, you can maintain information on a wide range of
transport-related services such as: scheduling an inspection at loading or
scheduling cleaning services for a ship.

Figure 148: Planning Tasks I

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 363



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

The bulk shipment functions support inbound purchases, outbound sales and
product transfers, and are integrated with the relevant SAP ECC process flows.
The underlying documents that can be assigned to and processed within a bulk
shipment include:
ï Inbound Deliveries
ï Outbound Deliveries
ï Reservations
During scheduling, documents are assigned to a shipment as load and/ or discharge
relevant. For example, if you mark a document as ìrelevant to loadingî, the
system proposes the product and quantities from the document during the loading
process. If you mark the document as ìrelevant to dischargeî, then the product
and quantities from the underlying document are defaulted during delivery
confirmation. These documents are the basis for material postings.
After assigning both documents and vehicles to a shipment, it is necessary
to specify how the vehicle should be loaded. The assignment of a product is
carried out at the compartment level for the vehicles assigned to the shipment.
Product compatibility and customer compatibility checks are carried out during
compartment planning, as well as checks on weight and volume constraints.

Figure 149: Planning Tasks II

Compartment Planning
If only one vehicle is assigned to the shipment, the system proposes that vehicle as
the one to be scheduled. Otherwise, you must enter a vehicle. The compartments
of the vehicle are represented by checkboxes next to each material line item.

364 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

If the vehicle has more than ten compartments, these can be viewed by using
the scroll buttons for horizontal scrolling. The checkboxes remain blank until
product is scheduled.
Compartment Information: for each compartment assigned to a vehicle
(represented as a check box in the Compartment Planning tabstrip) there are
boxes to represent the maximum quantity for the compartment and the balance
quantity (available capacity).

Loading Tasks
The load confirmation process records the actual quantities and products loaded
for a particular bulk shipment. Quantities in scheduling are planned quantities and
are defaulted at loading stage. Manual load confirmation is an alternative to data
entry using a Terminal Automation System (TAS).
Unplanned rebrands are used to cover cases where the sales order, delivery note
and schedule are for one product, but at the loading stage there is insufficient
product (ìdowngradingî).
The in-transit stock concept is central to the loading step. A goods movement
occurs when the product is moved into the in-transit plant or storage location, at
which point QCI parameters can be calculated and stored. In addition, any excise
duty postings that are a consequence of the goods movement are also carried out.
The underlying documents are updated with the ìrealî loaded quantities.
Following the completion of a load confirmation, a bill of lading may be produced.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 365



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 150: Loading Tasks

In-Transit Stock
A major function of bulk shipments is to keep track of in-transit stock with respect
to both quantity and value. When the goods are received, a goods receipt is posted
in the receiving (in-transit) plant or in-transit storage location (within a regular
plant) for the stock. The stock remains in the in-transit location until a transfer to
the actual receiving plant or customer is started during the delivery confirmation
step.
The assignment of the in-transit plant or storage location is specified in
customizing or in the underlying documents that are assigned to the shipment.
Whenever a goods movement occurs, dynamic quantity calculations are
required. During the load confirmation transaction, the goods movement into an
in-transit location prompts the system to make this calculation. The dialog box
containing the material default values appears for every material/storage location
combination.

366 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Figure 151: In-Transit Stock

Within the Stock Overview Report, it is possible to branch to a report in which the
loaded in-transit stock is listed by material and location. All the shipments which
have stock in that location are listed with the appropriate vehicle.
If the stock in the in-transit location differs from the stock loaded (for example,
due to manual postings), the differences will be contained in that report (report
name is ROIGSM00).

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 367



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 152: Loaded In-Transit Stock

Delivery Tasks
Delivery confirmation is the final step in processing bulk shipments. It enables
you to enter the final quantities delivered and to process the differences between
quantities delivered and loaded. The underlying documents are updated with
the 'real' delivered quantities.
During delivery confirmation, movement from in-transit stock to a destination
takes place. For that, goods movement quantities in alternative units of measure
are calculated and petroleum taxes are posted based on the tax status of the
in-transit stock and the tax status of the receiving plant or customer.

368 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Figure 153: Delivery Tasks

If the product cannot be delivered to the selected destination, several options exist
in the delivery confirmation transaction for recording where the product should go.
The product can be left on the vehicle in the compartment into which it had been
loaded. The action of leaving product on the vehicle means that the subsequent
shipment using that vehicle will have a prior-to-load quantity. The prior-to-load
quantity can be used to form part of the next shipment using that vehicle.
Product may be returned to the delivering plant if it is not to be delivered to the
intended destination. This process is carried out at the compartment level. Product
can also be rebranded upon its return to the delivering plant. This allows product
which had been rebranded during loading to be returned to the correct tank within
the delivering plant.
It is also possible to post the difference of loaded and discharged quantity as a gain
or loss. This could be due to real gains or losses or due to differences in measuring.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 369



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 154: Handling of Load-Discharge Differences

Document Flow
In order to be able to plan and execute bulk shipments, it is important that you
have an overview of planned shipment activities as well as shipments already
underway at all times. You have a number of tools at your disposal for this
purpose, for instance document flow.
Document flow presents an online history of related transactions in list form.
The document flow tracks the progress of a bulk shipments in order to be able to
respond to customer inquiries. It shows all documents associated with the bulk
shipment. You can select a document to display and then return to the document
flow. From a related document which you have selected, you can also branch
to the document flow for that document. You can also display the status of the
entire document and of each line item.

370 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Figure 155: Document Flow

Shipment Costing calculation and settlement
This component contains the functions for calculating and settling shipment
costs in transportation. The following items describe how the shipment costs are
determined in the shipment, how they are transmitted to accounting, and how they
are settled with the service provider and customer.
The shipment costs are recorded in a new system document, the shipment cost
document. From within this document, you can perform the following functions:
ï Calculate the shipment costs
ï Settle the costs with the service agent
ï Transfer the costs to FI and CO
ï Billing of shipment costs to customer (only for outbound process)

The above process is just an example. Posting goods issue, goods receipt and
transfer are not displayed.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 371



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 156: Shipment Costs in the Overall Process

During a shipment, several fees for external services are to be paid. The aim of
shipment costing is to determine the amount of each fee with respect to time,
distance, and loaded quantity for an automated settlement with the service
provider.
There are up to five elements in a shipment that can be relevant for costing:
vehicle, header, leg, load transfer point, and border crossing point. The latter
three are called stages.
The bulk shipment type controls the cost relevance.

Note: Shipment cost processing for core (LE-TRA) shipments uses the
same modules and system document. Specific features of core (LE-TRA)
shipments (e.g. shipping units) or of TD bulk shipments (for example
TD vehicle) are only supported for actual processed shipment category
(LE-TRA or IS-OIL-TD). The customizing for shipment costing is not
specific to one of the shipment categories. That is you can use the same
customizing to process core (LE-TRA) shipments and TD bulk shipments.
The shipment cost document is integrated in the document flow for SD
documents. You can call the document flow from the shipment cost
document.

Route for Shipment Costing
Route assignment

372 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

A route, as the connection between a point of depature and a destination point, can
consist of several stages. A stage can be:
ï Shipment leg, connection between a starting point and an end point
ï Load transfer point, point/location where a shipment is loaded/ unloaded or

reloaded from one means of transport to another
ï Border crossing point, point/location where a shipment crosses the border
For each stage, you can record information, such as: the responsible service agent,
default service agents, deadlines, distance, and so on.
The starting and end points of a stage are defined as transportation connection
points and can have a reference to a location (for example, plant, customer).
A route can also be the target area (for example, North America, Asia, and so on)
A shipment can contain one route per vehicle, and the route is defaulted from the
vehicle master. Stages can be deleted from a route during maintaining a shipment.

Figure 157: Route for Shipment Costing

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 373



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 158: Transportation Connection Point

Document assignment
For the calculation of the fees for a shipment, the loading and unloading point
must be assigned to each document.
The shipment type controls whether the calculation is based on loaded or unloaded
quantities.
Direct Document Stage Assignment: If a document is relevant to loading, you can
enter the corresponding loading point. If the document is relevant to discharge,
you can enter the discharge point. If the same loading point or discharge point is
used more than once in a route, then a selection pop-up appears, and the correct
stage for the document must be selected. For loading points you can enter the start
point of a leg, transfer point, or a boarder point. For discharge points you can enter
the end point of a leg, transfer point, or border point.
Automatic Document Stage Assignment: Documents can be automatically
assigned to stages by either selecting Automatic stage assignment in Customizing
for the bulk shipment type, or by selecting Auto assignment in the Document
Stage Assignment screen. The system proposes stage assignments based on the
Reference to location setting in Customizing for the transportation connection
points.
Quantity assignment

374 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

After completion of a shipment (status = 6) it is still possible to assign a route
and the relevant loading points for load relevant documents and discharge points
for all discharge relevant documents. These assignments are done on item level
for all scheduled documents.
The load relevant documents are automatically assigned to the associated vehicle.
If only one vehicle is present in the shipment, the discharge relevant documents
are also assigned automatically. In the Document Item Quantity Assignment for
the Shipment Costing discharge relevant quantities are linked to load relevant
quantities: the material quantity of a load-relevant document item is, when
possible, assigned to the first discharge-relevant document item found along the
route with the same material.
The system handles unassigned document quantities according to the following
principles: If shipment costing is based on loaded quantities, unassigned
loaded quantities (lost or left-on-vehicle quantities) are assigned to the last
discharge-relevant document item of the same material in the route. In this case
the system displays a gain/loss indicator. Unassigned discharged quantities
(gained or prior-to-load quantities) are not taken into account. If shipment costing
is based on discharged quantities the opposite is true.
An automatic document stage assignment is possible.

Partners in Bulk Shipments
The partner functions on this slide are examples. In bulk transportation, partners
are maintained on the following levels:
ï Shipment header
ï Vehicle
ï Stage
During shipment costing, these partners are used as service agents to whom
payment is due. Partner assigned at shipment header level: Partners used for the
entire shipment are maintained at the shipment header.
Partner assigned at vehicle level: You can assign partners to vehicles within a
shipment. For example, the partner could be a carrier responsible for the vehicle.
A different partner can be assigned to each vehicle in the shipment. You can
also assign carriers to vehicles in the vehicle master data so that the carrier is
automatically defaulted for the vehicle in a shipment.
Partner assigned at stage level: Partners can be assigned to stages within a
shipment. You can assign a different partner to each stage. For example, partner
assignment at stage level could be used for a customs agent at a border crossing.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 375



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Figure 159: Partners in Bulk Shipments

Shipment Cost Document
You can create shipment cost documents individually in dialog mode or using
collective processing. If you create a shipment cost document, you always directly
reference a shipment document. For each shipment document, you create exactly
one shipment cost document.
The shipment cost document consists of the shipment cost header and the
shipment cost items.
The shipment cost header contains general information on the entire document.
Status, reference, and administrative information is provided.

376 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Figure 160: Shipment Cost Document

The shipment cost items contain general data for shipment cost calculation and
settlement, such as: service agent, pricing and settlement date, tax amount, and
tax base amount. Each item has its own status for the shipment cost calculation,
account assignment and transfer functions.
The shipment cost items either refer to the shipment header, to the shipment
vehicle, or to the stage.
For example, an item that refers to the header can include insurance charges for
an additional shipment insurance. An item that refers to a shipment stage can
include load transfer costs, for example.
The function of the items of the shipment cost document is controlled through the
item category. Dependent on your settings, the system automatically calculates
the shipment costs, assigns them to an account, and transfers them to financial
accounting (SAP ERP Financials ) when you create the shipment cost document.

Shipment Cost Settlement with Service Provider
When shipment cost documents are created, the shipment cost items are generated
based on a pre-defined degree of automatic processing. This means that the
shipment cost items can be created automatically, and the shipment costs are
calculated, assigned, or transferred automatically.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 377



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

During account assignment, the system determines the correct G/L account in
Financial Accounting (SAP ERP Financials) for each shipment cost item and the
assignment for Controlling. Account assignment can be carried out at different
levels, depending on how detailed you want to track costs.
Transfer to Financial Accounting to establish accruals requires that services
performed are entered.
However, each service entry sheet is based on a purchase order. You must initially
have created this purchase order for the service agent in purchasing. During the
posting process, services performed are accepted; to establish accruals, the system
generates an accounting document in Financial Accounting. The system creates
additional subsequent documents in Accounting.
Using the credit memo procedure, also referred to as the ERS (Evaluated Receipt
Settlement) procedure, you can settle the shipment costs with the service agents
without having received invoices from them. You can choose from different
settlement periods. You transfer the calculated shipment costs to Financial
Accounting. The invoices are verified by the service agent. If the service agent
discovers variances, you can post those as subsequent debits/credits.
When you verify invoices manually, you receive an invoice from the service
agent. You manually create an invoice in the system, verify the invoice, and post
it manually.

Figure 161: Shipment Cost Settlement with Service Provider

A transfer to Financial Accounting to establish accruals requires the entry of
services performed. The corresponding sheet is automatically created by the
system during a transfer.

378 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Each service entry sheet is based on an external service order. So that the costs
can be transferred to Financial Accounting and thus settled, the system must
determine a valid service order. This external service order must have been
created in purchasing. You can create the service order monthly for the service
agent. Important criteria for the service order include: service agent, purchasing
organization, purchasing group, plant, and item category.

Figure 162: Transfer to Financial Accounting

When the system has automatically determined a valid service order, a service
entry sheet is created that refers to the service order. During the posting process,
services performed are accepted; to establish accruals, the system generates an
accounting document in Financial Accounting.
Using the credit memo procedure, you can create single credit memos, that is,
you can create a credit memo for each shipment cost item (and service agent), or
you periodically create collective credit memos by service agent. The settlement
periods for periodic settlement are flexible.

Settlement of Shipment Costs with the Customer
You can bill the customer for the actual shipment costs that were calculated with
the forwarding agent in transportation and shipment processing. These shipment
costs then appear in the billing document as an additional entry.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 379



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Shipment costs calculated from the delivery items in the shipment cost document
are assigned directly to their corresponding billing document items. Costs based
on other factors, for example, the shipment cost items, are distributed among the
billing document items according to the proportional weight of the delivery items.

Figure 163: Settlement of Shipment Costs with the Customer

You can bill shipment costs to the customer with respect to shipment-specific
parameters (distance, tariff zone). The costs are based on effective shipment costs
that were calculated and settled with the service provider using the shipment
costing function. Shipment costs are included in the bill as a separate item.
Shipment costs can represent a considerable portion of the total cost billed to the
customer. For this reason, they are not contained in the material price but are
calculated separately by the shipper to be billed to the customer.
You could invoice the customer with shipment costs by calculating them as
surcharges in SD pricing. However, this method does not allow you to take into
account all the criteria that influence transportation (such as distance, tariff zones,
means of transport, type and number of pallets). Now, you can calculate shipment
costs taking into account all transportation-specific criteria that should be included
in the customer invoice. The shipment costs appear as an additional entry in
the customer billing document. You can use all the calculation options that are
available in the shipment cost document for settlement with the forwarding agent.
Shipment costs that are calculated in the shipment cost document using delivery
items are assigned to the corresponding billing item directly. Costs with a different
calculation basis, such as on the basis of shipment cost items, are distributed
proportionally among the billing items.

380 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Exercise 11: Transportation Processing
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Create Transportation Master Data to keep the vehicle fleet in the system
ï Create Bulk Shipment to schedule transportation of petroleum products to

the customer location
ï Process Bulk Shipment to arrange loading and discharging of petroleum

products.
ï Analyze the Document Flow created under the Bulk Shipment in the system.

Business Example
VOIL DE (CC1100) commissions external service agents (vendor 400018) to
deliver the petroleum products to the Customer location (3400XX - Retail West),
but is responsible for the organization and execution of bulk shipments. Although
VOIL DE (CC1100) does not have its own fleet of trucks, VOIL DE maintains
master data records for trucks in the system. This is because the company wants to
schedule shipments at the vehicle/compartment level.

Task:
When scheduling a bulk shipment, vehicle selection is based on the carrier
(vendor 400018) that VOIL DE chooses. A specific vehicle (TRAILER-XX)
normally drives the same route (2TDRDU), so the route is defaulted from the
vehicle master data into the bulk shipment. The main task of the scheduler is to
assign delivery documents items to the bulk shipment based on the departure and
destination points of the vehicle. The scheduler also assigns petroleum products to
the compartments of the vehicle.
When the truck arrives at the distribution terminal (Plant 1103) for loading,
petroleum product is filled into the compartments of the vehicle. During loading,
quantities may differ from the quantities that were scheduled.
After delivery, the delivered quantities are entered in the system. Again, the
delivered quantities could differ from the quantities scheduled or loaded. You can
post the difference as a gain or loss or as left on vehicle. You can also book the
difference in quantity as a return to the depot.
1. Your Customer (3400XX - Retail West) allocated in Dusseldorf requests for

Diesel to be delivered at the customer location. You are planning to deliver
the material item by truck from your Plant (1003) in Dresden. Create a sales
order and a delivery for DIESEL-XX for your customer's ship-to location.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 381



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

With the first step you have to create a document for the sale of product
to a Customer.

2. Create an Outbound delivery for the sales order (created at the previous step)
3. Create two transport units, a truck mover and a trailer, and assign them to

one vehicle. With the first step you have to create a truck mover.
4. You want to create a bulk shipment with schedule dates, a vehicle. You

can select the outbound delivery (from the previous step) that you want to
schedule and carry out compartment planning.

5. Loading a Bulk Shipment. After scheduling the bulk shipment, the next
step is to record the loading data in the system. Process the bulk shipment
(created on the previous step) to post the loading quantities. You can run
your Sock Overview report to check the in-transit stock loaded.

6. Delivering a Bulk Shipment. After loading your truck, the next step is to
record the delivery data in the system.

7. Analyzing the Document Flow. The document flow displays the history of
the bulk shipment documents and therefore provides information about the
status of a shipment.

382 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Solution 11: Transportation Processing
Task:
When scheduling a bulk shipment, vehicle selection is based on the carrier
(vendor 400018) that VOIL DE chooses. A specific vehicle (TRAILER-XX)
normally drives the same route (2TDRDU), so the route is defaulted from the
vehicle master data into the bulk shipment. The main task of the scheduler is to
assign delivery documents items to the bulk shipment based on the departure and
destination points of the vehicle. The scheduler also assigns petroleum products to
the compartments of the vehicle.
When the truck arrives at the distribution terminal (Plant 1103) for loading,
petroleum product is filled into the compartments of the vehicle. During loading,
quantities may differ from the quantities that were scheduled.
After delivery, the delivered quantities are entered in the system. Again, the
delivered quantities could differ from the quantities scheduled or loaded. You can
post the difference as a gain or loss or as left on vehicle. You can also book the
difference in quantity as a return to the depot.
1. Your Customer (3400XX - Retail West) allocated in Dusseldorf requests for

Diesel to be delivered at the customer location. You are planning to deliver
the material item by truck from your Plant (1003) in Dresden. Create a sales
order and a delivery for DIESEL-XX for your customer's ship-to location.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 383



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

With the first step you have to create a document for the sale of product
to a Customer.
a) Create a sales order:

Choose Logistics→ Sales and distribution→ Sales→ Order→ Create
To reach transaction [VA01]
Enter the following data on the Initial screen:

Field Name Values
Order type: OR standard order
Organizational data
Sales Organization 1100

Distribution Channel 30
Division 13

Press Enter
Enter the following data in the Header area on the Overview screen:

Field Name Values
Sold-to party 3400XX - Retail West
PO Number IOG100-TD-XX

Select the tab Sales and enter the following data for material items:

Material DIESEL-XX
Order quantity 6,000 M15

Select the tab Shipping and enter the following data

Field Name Values
Route 1TDRDU

Press Save and note the sales order number.

Continued on next page

384 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

2. Create an Outbound delivery for the sales order (created at the previous step)
a) Create an outbound delivery

Choose Logistics → Sales and distribution → Shipping and
Transportation→ Outbound Delivery→ Create→ Single Document
→ With Reference to Sales Order
To reach transaction [VL01N]
Enter the following data on the Create Outbound Delivery screen:

Field Name Values
Shipping point 1103
Selection date Current date
Order 52### (input the sales order number

from previous step)

(Do not enter Storage Location or pick up quantity)
Press Enter, choose in the menu Goto ñ Header - Processing and notice
the statuses in Overall Status area.

Field Name Values
Document Status Checked
Picking A Not yet picked
WM Activities No WM order required
Confirmation A Not confirm Pick
Pack Packing not required
Goods Issue A Not yet started
Billing Docs A Not invoiced

Press Save and note the outbound delivery number.
3. Create two transport units, a truck mover and a trailer, and assign them to

one vehicle. With the first step you have to create a truck mover.
a) Create a truck mover

Choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk transportation→
Master data→ Transport unit→ Create
To reach transaction [O4C1]
Enter the following data on the Initial screen:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 385



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Field Name Values
Transport unit MOVER-XX
TU type RDPM
Copy from
Transport unit MOVER-99

Press Enter and look trough the data on Details screen
Verify transport unit attributes for the truck mover

Field Name Values
TU type RDPM Truck - Tractor(Road Prime

Mover)
Mode of transportation 1 Road
TU status Transport unit available
Transportation Planning EURO Europe
Point
Carrier 400018 Petroleum Transportation

Press Save.
b) Create a Trailer

Choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk transportation→
Master data→ Transport unit→ Create
To reach transaction [O4C1]
Enter the following data on the Initial screen:

Field Name Values
Transport unit TRAILER-XX
TU type RDTR
Copy from
Transport unit TRAILER-99

Press Enter and look trough the data on Details screen
Verify transport unit attributes for the trailer.

Continued on next page

386 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Field Name Values
TU type RDTR Truck - Trailer (Road Trailer)
Physical type 2 trailer (no engine)
Mode of transportation 1 Road
TU status Transport unit available
Transportation Planning EURO Europe
Point
Carrier 400018 Petroleum Transportation

Choose Goto ñ Compartments (Shift+F7) in the menu to navigate
to Compartments screen
Verify compartment items data for the trailer.

Sequence Compartment Description TD
number maximum compartment

volume loading
sequence

1 6000,000 L petroleum 1
products

2 6000,000 L petroleum 2
products

3 6000,000 L petroleum 3
products

Choose Goto ñ Details screen (Shift+F6) in the menu to transport unit
details and notice transport unit attributes

Field Name Values
Maximum volume 18000,000
Volume UoM L

Press Save.
c) Create a truck and assign the transport units created in previous steps to

the truck:
Choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk transportation→
Master data→ Vehicle→ Create
To reach transaction [O4V1]

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 387



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Enter the following data on the Initial screen:

Field Name Values
Transport unit TRUC-XX
TU type TRUC Standard Truck

Copy from

Transport unit TRUC-99

Press Enter and look trough the data on Details screen
Verify vehicle attributes for the truck

Field Name Values
Vehicle type TRUC Standard Truck
Transportation Planning EURO Europe
Point
Carrier 400018 Petroleum Transportation

Vehicle route 2TDRDU Dresden - Dusseldorf (2 level
panning)

Plant 1103

Mode of transportation 1 Road

Change the following data

Field Name Values
TD vehicle header text Gasoline truck XX
Identifier IOG100-XX

Choose Goto ñ TU assignment (Shift+F7) in the menu to navigate to
Transport Unit Assignment screen
Select transportation units assigned to the vehicle by default and choose
Edit - Delete line item (F8) in the menu to delete them. Enter the
following data on the Transport Unit Assignment screen:

Continued on next page

388 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Sequence Transportation Maximum Number of
number unit volume for compartments

transport unit
1 MOVER-XX - 0
2 TRAILER-XX 18000,000 3

Choose Goto ñ Details screen (Ctrl+F1) in the menu to vehicle details
and notice vehicle attributes

Field Name Values
Maximum volume 18000,000
Volume UoM L

Press Save.
4. You want to create a bulk shipment with schedule dates, a vehicle. You

can select the outbound delivery (from the previous step) that you want to
schedule and carry out compartment planning.
a) Create a Bulk Shipment

Choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk transportation→
Shipment→ Scheduling→ Create shipment
To reach transaction [O4F1]
Enter the following data on the Create Bulk Schedule screen:

Field Name Values
Transportation Planning EURO Europe
Point
Bulk shipment type TREU European standard truck

Press Enter and notice the data are copied in the Shipment Header area
and also notice the following data.

Field Name Values
Mode of transport 1 Road
Shipment Status 1 - Partially scheduled
(Functional

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 389



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Choose Goto ñ Shipment Header in the menu and enter the following
data

Field Name Values
Planned: (Todayís date)
Load start: (Tomorrowís date)

Load end: (Tomorrowís date)

Delivery confirmation (Tomorrowís date)
start:
Delivery confirmation end: (Tomorrowís date)

Press Enter and notice that checkboxes are selected as the planning
dates are in the system.
Choose Goto ñ Vehicle Overview in the menu and enter the following
data

Field Name Data
Vehicle TRUCK-XX

Choose Enter and notice the Carrier and Route are defaulted from
the Vehicle master data records
Choose Goto ñ Document Overview in the menu and assign the
outbound delivery document to your shipment, enter the following data:

Field Name Data
Document 800XXXXX (input the outbound

delivery number from previous step)

Note: You can either enter the outbound delivery number
directly, or search for it in the document select report.

Press Enter and notice the relevant data are defaulted from the
outbound delivery.
Choose Goto ñ Compartment Planning in the menu, the delivery item
is displayed and can be assigned to the compartments of your vehicle.
Select check box for compartment 1 for DIESEL-XX in the area
Compartment planning.

Continued on next page

390 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Press Enter and notice the relevant data are updated in the area
Compartment information
Choose Goto ñ Maintain Stages in the menu, the stage items for bulk
shipment are displayed.
Change the Destination point name (transportation connection point)
for stage 4 to the number of your customer as follow:

Field Name Values
Destination point 3400XX - Retail West

Press Enter and notice the description of Destination point is defaulted
from the transportation connection point master data.
Choose Goto ñ Document Stage Assingment in the menu, the document
item for bulk shipment is assigned to transportation connection point
as follows

Field Name Values
Document number 800XXXXX (input the outbound

delivery number from previous step)
Loading point DRESDEN

Discharge point 3400XX

Choose Environment ñ Shipment Overview in the menu to look the
report.
Press F3 to go to Create Bulk Shipment screen
Choose Shipment ñ Confirm Schedule in the menu and make note of the
shipment number.

5. Loading a Bulk Shipment. After scheduling the bulk shipment, the next
step is to record the loading data in the system. Process the bulk shipment
(created on the previous step) to post the loading quantities. You can run
your Sock Overview report to check the in-transit stock loaded.
a) Load confirmation for a Bulk Shipment

Choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk transportation→
Shipment→ Load confirmation→ Create/ change
To reach transaction [O4G1]
Enter the following data on the Change Loading Confirmation screen:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 391



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Field Name Values
Bulk shipment XXX (input the bulk shipment number

from previous step)

Press Enter and notice the relevant data are defaulted from the bulk
shipment number.
Choose Goto ñ Load Bulk in the menu, the material items for bulk
shipment loading are displayed.
The material item DIESEL-XX quantity displayed is the same as the
quantity that you scheduled
Enter the following data for material item (item is relevant to a
compartment assigned at the previous step on Compartment planning
tab)

Field Name Values
Loading storage location BULK
Batch (loading) UTAX

Note: you have to use F4 button to select the data from the list.

Press Enter to display the Quantity Conversion Interface screen
Choose Calculate (F8) button to determine the additional quantities
for your material DIESEL-XX.
Choose Continue (F5) to go back to Shipment/Load Bulk screen and
notice once you have accepted the quantity conversion, the color of the
material item should change to black.
Choose Edit ñ Select All in the menu to select the material item
Choose Goto ñ InTransitLocation/Batch to display the screen to assign
the in-transit Storage Location as follow:

Field Name Values
Storage location ROAD

Note: you have to use F4 button to select the data from the
list, if the location is different.

Press Enter and confirm information system message to go back to
Shipment/Load Bulk screen

Continued on next page

392 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

Choose Edit ñ Select All in the menu to select the material item
Click on Activate Proposal (Ctrl+F5) button in the header area
Choose Edit ñ Confirm Loading (Shift+F1) in the menu to select the
material item
The system message confirms that the bulk shipment ### has been
saved.

b) To check your in-transit stock, display the inventory management stock
overview. Call up the transaction as follows.
Choose Logistics→ Materials Management→ Inventory Management
→ Environment→ Stock→ Stock Overview
To reach transaction [MMBE]
Enter the following data on the Stock Overview screen:

Field Name Values
Material DIESEL-XX
Plant 1103

Choose Program ñ Execute in the menu to look the in-transit stock
quantities at 1003/ROAD and 1003/BULK
Leave the transaction by choosing Exit (Shift + F3).

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 393



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

6. Delivering a Bulk Shipment. After loading your truck, the next step is to
record the delivery data in the system.
a) Delivery Confirmation for a Bulk shipment

Choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk transportation→
Shipment→ Delivery confirmation→ Create/ change
To reach transaction [O4H1]
Enter the following data on the Change Delivery Confirmation screen:

Field Name Values
Bulk shipment XXX (input the bulk shipment number

from previous step)

Press Enter and notice the relevant data are defaulted from the bulk
shipment number.
Choose Goto ñ Document Overview in the menu, the delivery items for
a bulk shipment are displayed.
Choose Goto ñ Fast Delivery Confirmation in the menu, the fast
confirmation items for a bulk shipment are displayed.
Select the delivery item and choose Goto ñ QCI Parameters to display
the Quantity Conversion Interface screen.
Choose Calculate (F8) button to determine the additional quantities
for your material DIESEL-XX.
Choose Continue (F5) to go back to Fast Delivery Confirmation screen
and notice once you have accepted the quantity conversion, the color
of the delivery item should change to black.
Select the delivery item and choose Edit ñ Activate Proposal to save
the proposed quantity.
Choose Edit ñ Confirm Delivery (Shift+F1) in the
The system message confirms that the bulk shipment ### has been
saved.

Continued on next page

394 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Transportation and Shipment Costing

7. Analyzing the Document Flow. The document flow displays the history of
the bulk shipment documents and therefore provides information about the
status of a shipment.
a) Display a Bulk Shipment

Choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Bulk transportation→
Shipment→ Scheduling→ Display shipment
To reach transaction [O4F3]
Enter the following data on the Display Bulk Schedule screen:

Field Name Values
Bulk shipment XXX (input the bulk shipment number

from previous step)

Press Enter to display the bulk shipment and notice in the Shipment
Header area the following data

Field Name Values
Mode of transport 1 Road
Shipment Status 6 - Completely delivered
(Functional)

Choose Goto ñ Shipment Header in the menu and you can see that the
loading and delivery dates (two columns Panning and Actual) have
been updated on the Header tab.
Choose Environment ñ Shipment Overview in the menu to look the
report.
Press F3 to go back to Display Bulk Shipment screen
Choose Environment ñ Document Flow in the menu to look the
document flow created under the bulk shipment. Select the Outbound
Delivery document and choose Display document
Choose Environment ñ Document Flow in the menu to get the material
documents numbers for loading and delivery confirmations created via
Bulk Transportation transactions.
Press F3 until you leave the transaction.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 395



Unit 7: Secondary Distribution IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain how bulk shipments are integrated within the supply chain and

explain the in-transit stock concept
ï Create the different document types that can be assigned to a bulk shipment

for purchases, sales and transfers in the SAP for Oil&Gas
ï Create a vehicle for a bulk shipment, distinguish the different kinds of meters

for loading and discharging a vehicle, describe which kinds of compatibilities
can be set up for processing a bulk shipment

ï Explain the use of routes and service providers within bulk shipments, assign
routes and service providers to a bulk shipment, assign the document items
of the underlying documents to the stages of a route

ï Process bulk shipments: schedule a bulk shipment, load a simple bulk
shipment, deliver a simple bulk shipment and post a loss during delivery
confirmation, analyze the document flow within a bulk shipment

ï Create a shipment cost document, explain how costs are calculated, settle
costs with a service provider, and invoice costs to customers.

396 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Unit Summary

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain how bulk shipments are integrated within the supply chain and

explain the in-transit stock concept
ï Create the different document types that can be assigned to a bulk shipment

for purchases, sales and transfers in the SAP for Oil&Gas
ï Create a vehicle for a bulk shipment, distinguish the different kinds of meters

for loading and discharging a vehicle, describe which kinds of compatibilities
can be set up for processing a bulk shipment

ï Explain the use of routes and service providers within bulk shipments, assign
routes and service providers to a bulk shipment, assign the document items
of the underlying documents to the stages of a route

ï Process bulk shipments: schedule a bulk shipment, load a simple bulk
shipment, deliver a simple bulk shipment and post a loss during delivery
confirmation, analyze the document flow within a bulk shipment

ï Create a shipment cost document, explain how costs are calculated, settle
costs with a service provider, and invoice costs to customers.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 397



Unit Summary IOG100

398 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 8
Service Station Retailing

Unit Overview
This unit gives brief overview of the typical structure of SAP Service Station
Retailing (SAP SSR) solution of SAP for Oil&Gas and main components of the
SSR solution. Wet stock handling (fuels pricing, meter and dip reading, payment
cards, and invoicing the service station partner). Provides an understanding of the
SSR concept, data upload, error handling, and Customizing.

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Explain what is Service Station and Convenience Retailing (SSCR) solution
ï Which parties are involved in the Service Station and Convenience Retailing

(SSCR) business?
ï Which data is transmitted from and to the parties involved?
ï Explain the master data concept
ï Create a business location
ï Create master data at the general level
ï Assign a material handling group and a processing profile to a location
ï Create master data at the business type level
ï Explain the flexibility of pricing within SSR
ï Maintain relevant pricing master data
ï Maintain prices based on the competitor prices
ï Describe network and group pricing
ï Explain the reports on fuels pricing.
ï Describe the meter reading process
ï Maintain meter reading master data
ï Describe the performed checks during the upload process
ï Explain the meter reading error maintenance
ï Perform meter reading maintenance
ï Describe the dip reading process
ï Maintain storage object master data

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 399



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

ï Describe the checks during upload process
ï Explain the dip reading error maintenance
ï Post stock corrections
ï Execute and control the payment card process including complaint processing
ï Explain the master data ñ three level concept
ï Describe the transaction upload process
ï Explain the splitting concept
ï Display, change, and create payment card transactions
ï Describe clearing house and fleet card company settlement
ï Create the service station partner invoice
ï Reverse the service station partner invoice
ï Analyze the service station partner invoice.

Unit Contents
Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .401

Exercise 12: Service Station Fuel Management .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415
Lesson: Service Station Retailing .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .430

Exercise 13: Station Fuel Pricing.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .443
Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .458

Exercise 14: Meter and Dip Reading Management.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .475
Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing ... . . . . . . .501

Exercise 15: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing 517

400 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain fuel sales process, different business types which
supported by SSCR solution. Also lesson gives you an overview on master data
for Service Stations. Depending on how the station business is organized, an
oil company can deal with service station partners, clearing houses and fleet
card companies.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Explain what is Service Station and Convenience Retailing (SSCR) solution
ï Which parties are involved in the Service Station and Convenience Retailing

(SSCR) business?
ï Which data is transmitted from and to the parties involved?
ï Explain the master data concept
ï Create a business location
ï Create master data at the general level
ï Assign a material handling group and a processing profile to a location
ï Create master data at the business type level

Business Example
German Oil Company (VOIL DE) delivers fuel to the service stations. Fuel sold
at service stations is owned by VOIL DE. Service station partners sell VOIL
DE products and their own products. You work in the VOIL DE Companyís
retail network department. You wish to register one new company owned and
dealer operated service station in your ERP System. You do this by creating a new
location master record. The service station partner acts as an agent and all fuels
stocks remain the property of your company until they are sold to consumers. As
a prerequisite for the processes used for invoicing the dealer using sales meter
readings and updating book stock, you need to register the locationís tanks and
sales meter devices and link the partner to your location.

Supply Chain Overview
The handling of the dry stock and wet stock supply chains is based on different
requirements. The replenishment of fuels is handled in a different way than the
replenishment of shop products.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 401



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 164: Supply Chain Overview

SAP for Oil&Gas enables the customer to manage the entire supply chain, from
Exploration and Production to Service Station Retailing. Handling of the dry stock
supply chain and wet stock supply chain are the key processes in Service Station
and Convenience Retailing (SSCR).

SSR Functions In SAP for Oil&Gas
SSR is a module of SAP for Oil&Gas. SSR is the fuels retailing functionality for
the management of wet stocks and payment card handling at a service station.

402 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Figure 165: Overview: SSR Functions In SAP for Oil&GAS

The following functions for wet stock handling are available:
ï Meter reading transmission
ï Dip reading transmission
ï Competitor prices upload
ï Location master data display
ï Payment cards management

SSCR Business Types
The relationship between the oil company and service stations can be based on
different concepts:
ï COCO Company owned / company operated
ï CODO Company owned / dealer operated
ï DODO Dealer owned / dealer operated

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 403



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 166: SSCR Business Types

The oil company is the owner of the products sold at the service stations, such as
fuels and lubes. The oil company is responsible for:
ï Uploading sales information on these products. This is done once or several

times a day.
ï Pricing the products and downloading the prices to the service stations.
ï Collecting the payment card transactions centrally for settlement with the

service station partner and the clearing houses.
In some cases, the service station partner is owner of other products (convenience
store products) sold at the service station, such as magazines, beverages, sweets,
and accessories for cars. The service station partner is responsible for:
ï Transmission of competitor prices whenever they change.
ï Correct handling (that is, black list check or online authorization of payment

card transactions).
ï Transmission of dip readings in the event of technical problems.

Data Exchange Overview
SSCR is designed to handle large volumes of data transmitted from one party to
another. Some data is exchanged periodically, on a regular basis, while other data
transmissions are triggered by an event.

404 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Figure 167: Data Exchange Overview

Periodically transmitted data includes:
ï Payment card transactions sent daily from the service station to the oil

company.
ï Meter readings and dip readings sent daily or weekly from the service station

to the oil company.
ï Credit card transactions sent daily from the oil company to the credit card

clearing house.
ï Fleet card transactions sent (the frequency depends on the fleet card

company) from the oil company to fleet card companies.
Data transmitted after a user-initiated event:
ï Competitor prices sent from the service station to the oil company
ï New prices sent from the oil company to the service station
ï Black list sent from the clearing houses to the oil company

Technical Concepts
SSR allows direct communication between the oil company system and the
point-of-sale (POS) system or an integration system for data exchange between oil
company and service station systems.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 405



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 168: Technical Concepts

To enable the transfer of data between company headquarters and business
locations in the retail network, interfaces based on Business Application
Programming Interface (BAPI) technology have been developed. This allows
external systems to access data in the SAP for Oil&Gas system synchronously.
Intermediate document (IDoc) technology provides asynchronous data access in
an additional asynchronous layer around the BAPI interfaces.

406 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Master Data

Figure 169: Master Data

Defining a business location
Explanation of the following concepts:
ï Location type
ï Business type
ï Processing profile
ï Material handling group
ï Master data at the general level
ï Master data at the business type level

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 407



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Location types

Figure 170: Location types

The location type is the primary means of categorizing business locations. You
therefore have to select a location type when you create a business location master
record. The business location type typically describes the:
ï Function of the business location (for example, depot or service station).
ï Nature of the relationship of the business location to your own organization

(for example, company-owned, dealer-operated service station or dealer-
owned, dealer-operated service station).

You use this categorization to control which processing parameters apply to the
business location, and to control the screen output for maintaining and displaying
master data.

Business Type
The business type is used to identify the different types of business in the SSR
environment. These can include, for example, Fuels or Convenience store.

408 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Figure 171: Business Type

You can assign a retail network business type to a business location to supplement
the control of screen output and processing options provided by the business
location type.
Specifically, the assignment of a business type to a location allows you to:
ï Simplify maintenance and display of business location master data by linking

screen output to the type of business
ï Control object links to align objects with the type of business
ï Set user authorization to display and maintain master data at business type

level
For example, if you require bulk fuel processing functions for a location, you can
assign the corresponding business type to that business location. You can then
authorize display and maintenance of fuel-related business location master data
to those responsible for this business.
By accessing the business location master using that business type, employees can
then display or maintain data relating to the fuels business (for example, meter
data, competitor list, and price control data.). If further lines of business, such as
convenience store retailing, are carried out at the location, you can assign the
corresponding business types to enable the appropriate processing and master data
maintenance activities.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 409



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Location Master Data at General Level
The following business location master data can be displayed and maintained at
the general level:

410 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Figure 172: Location Master Data at General Level

ï Address, history, and object status information.
ï Organization ñ Location area assignment of persons responsible at

headquarters for a region, area or sub-area.
ï Partner role assignments ñ When you assign a partner to a location, you

define both a location partner role type and a start time. This assignment to a
customer master record allows the SD billing process to bill your process.

ï Payment card data ñ Including the payment cards accepted at the location
and related information.

ï Storage object characteristics (SOC) ñ The dimensions and other attributes
that may influence logistical processes associated with storage objects.

ï Site control parameters (SCP) ñ Site-specific parameters that influence bulk
replenishment planning.

ï Object links ñ Each business location can be linked to other application
objects in your system. You can assign objects (plant, storage location, profit
center, cost center) to each business location.

ï Control data ñ The process control group controls the execution of the daily
claim, meter reading, and invoicing processes for a business location. The
conversion group determines how the system converts field values received
through interfaces to external systems.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 411



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Location Master Data at Business Type Level
As certain business location master data is related to the type of business carried
out at a business location, you must enter such business-specific data at the
business type level.

Figure 173: Location Master Data at Business Type Level

The following business location master data can be displayed and maintained at
the business type level:
ï Competitor locations
ï Sales meters
ï Object links
ï Control data, such as:

ñ Material handling group
ñ Processing profile
ñ Price control groups
ñ Invoicing block indicator (used to stop automatic invoicing for this

location, for example, during a changeover of partner)
ï Status, such as the location status for the fuels business
ï Long texts

Material Handling Group
The material handling group is set up as master data and is linked to a location.

412 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Figure 174: Material Handling Group

You assign material handling groups to business locations to enable the system to
determine the materials that are relevant for processing at a location, and:
ï Whether uploaded meter readings should be used to create invoicing

documents
ï Whether a material is owned by the oil company
ï Whether the upload of meter readings or POS data creates goods movements

for a material
ï Whether a bill of material explosion should occur when goods movements

are created for the material
Example: A material handling group may include a fuel product for which billing
documents are to be created, using meter readings to calculate invoiced amounts.
If you assign this material handling group to a business location, and a process
control group that includes the processes required to enable billing of the service
station partner, the system can create billing documents for sales of this material
when the service station partner invoicing process runs.

Processing Profile
Most processes in the service station retailing business run automatically in the
background. The processing profile is a flexible tool that contains parameters for
automatic processing and for settlement with service station partners.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 413



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 175: Processing Profile

The processing profile is defined in Customizing and is assigned to a location.
The processing profile specifies default parameters for processing. These relate to:
ï Partner role (relevant for invoicing)
ï Meter reading (sales unit, price change tolerance, meter reading calendar

schedule)
ï Dip reading (tolerance level for warning and error messages during

adjustment of logical and physical stock)
ï Invoicing (invoicing calendar, payment method, partner bank type)
ï Logistics documents (parameters such as temperature and density)

414 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Exercise 12: Service Station Fuel
Management
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Create master data at the general level
ï Create master data at the business type level

Business Example
You work in the VOIL Companyís retail network department. Your company has
just opened a new service station and you have just registered this as a business
location in the system. The service station partner will act as an agent and all fuels
stocks will remain the property of your company until they are sold to consumers.

Task 1:
Maintain Location master data for proper fuel management on your company.
You need to ensure that the retail network is divided into appropriate regions, areas
and sub-areas, and check that the relevant managers are assigned correctly.
1. Assign a location area to location LOCAT-## at general level.

Location area assignment: Northern/Urban/Industrial.
The relevant managers appear in the location area assignment box. Where
are they defaulted from?
______________________________________________________

Task 2:
The location was under construction for some days. Today you can reopen the
location.
1. Set the location status to Location open (Date valid from: 1st of the current

month) What happened to the Date valid to entry for the previous status?
______________________________________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 415



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Task 3:
You want to link the service station to other system objects that are being used to
depict the service station for various business applications. You will do this by
creating object links between the business location master record that you are
using to depict the service station and these other objects.
1. Assign your cost center CCTR-## (controlling area 1100) to your service

station LOCAT-##.
2. Check which storage location and plant your location is linked to Note the

storage location and the plant.
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________

3. What is the stock quantity for DIESEL-SSR at your storage location ST##
and at the plant 1104.
ST##: ________________________
1104: ________________________

Task 4:
On the basis of strategic decisions, the person responsible for payment cards has
decided which payment cards should be accepted at the newly acquired location,
and has told you the names of these cards. The cards include several standard
credit cards, such as MasterCard and VISA, and fleet cards.
1. Assign these card types to the location:

Payment card type: MAST
Valid from: (1st day of the current month)
BL Check amount: 150 EUR
CH Check amount: 300

Payment card type: VISA
Valid from: (1st day of the current month)

Let the system default the values for BL Check amount and CH Check
amount.
Where are these check amounts defaulted from?
______________________________________________________

Continued on next page

416 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Task 5:
You will verify that the partner role and the customer linked to your business
location are correct.
1. Check the partner role for fuels operator and the customer ID for that partner

role. Note the partner role and partner ID.
______________________________________________________

2. Display the address of the customer assigned as a fuels operator to
STATION-##, and check if the link to the service station location has been
created.
To do this, you choose Display Partner in the Change Partner Role screen.

Task 6:
Site control parameters record site information that is used to control or influence
bulk logistical processes such as delivery planning, shipment scheduling and
unloading operations.
1. Change the opening hours for Sundays and holidays to:

Morning: 10:00 (Opening time)
Afternoon: 22:00 (Closing time)

Task 7:
To enable the processes of invoicing the dealer on the basis of sales meter readings
and of updating book stock, you need to register the locationís sales meter devices
and tanks respectively. You do this by creating a set of meters and storage object
characteristics for the location.
1. Create a characteristic set for a gasoline tank at the location

Storage object type: TANK_50000
Sequence number.: TANK_S1

2. Assign a material to the gasoline tank.

Material: SUPER-SSR
Start date: (1st day of the current month)

3. Define a meter that captures the sales volume (for a material) from the
location

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 417



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Material: SUPER-SSR
Service type: SELF
Date valid from: (1st day of the current month)
Sequence number.: Meter_S1
Meter description: Meter of group-##
Number of digits: 8
Conversion factor: 1
Volume unit of measure L

Remember that meters are assigned at business type level.

Task 8:
You wish to assign a second competitor station to your service station, and
maintain data describing this relationship.
Remember that competitors are assigned at business type level.
1. Assign a competitor

Location ID: COMP02-##
Distance 50
Unit of measure M
Date valid from: (1st day of the current month)

2. You want to see more details of competitor COMP02-##. Select the
appropriate line and choose Competitor details.
Select Change competitor location (General).
Note the payment cards accepted at the competitor location.
______________________________________________________

418 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Solution 12: Service Station Fuel
Management
Task 1:
Maintain Location master data for proper fuel management on your company.
You need to ensure that the retail network is divided into appropriate regions, areas
and sub-areas, and check that the relevant managers are assigned correctly.
1. Assign a location area to location LOCAT-## at general level.

Location area assignment: Northern/Urban/Industrial.
The relevant managers appear in the location area assignment box. Where
are they defaulted from?

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 419



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

______________________________________________________
a) You ensure that the retail network is divided into appropriate regions,

areas and sub-areas, and assign the relevant managers.
You assign the location area to your business location. Choose
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Master data→ Location→ Change
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Business type: (Leave blank)
Choose Enter.
Choose the Organization tab.
In field Area Assign, use the F4 help to display a list of possible
selections.
Select LAA02
Choose Enter. The region, area and sub-area and the responsible
managers are displayed.
The managers are defaulted from network manager assignments
maintenance.
To display network manager assignments, open another R/3 session,
and choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Master data→ Network manager assignments→ Display
Country: DE
Choose Enter.

Task 2:
The location was under construction for some days. Today you can reopen the
location.
1. Set the location status to Location open (Date valid from: 1st of the current

month) What happened to the Date valid to entry for the previous status?

Continued on next page

420 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

______________________________________________________
a) Reopen the location.

Go back to the session with the Change business location screen.
Choose the Status tab.
Choose Insert line.
The Create location status dialog box appears.
Display a list of possible selections.
Select 02 (Location open)
Enter:
Date valid from: (1st day of the current month)
The Date valid to of the previous status becomes the last day of the
previous month.

Task 3:
You want to link the service station to other system objects that are being used to
depict the service station for various business applications. You will do this by
creating object links between the business location master record that you are
using to depict the service station and these other objects.
1. Assign your cost center CCTR-## (controlling area 1100) to your service

station LOCAT-##.
a) Link the service station definition to other system objects that are being

used to depict the service station for various business applications.
Assign your cost center CCTR-## (1100) to your service station
LOCAT-##.
Choose the Object links tab.
In the field Cost center, display a list of possible selections.
Select CCTR-## (cost center)
Choose Enter.

2. Check which storage location and plant your location is linked to Note the
storage location and the plant.
______________________________________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 421



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

______________________________________________________
a) Link the service station definition to other system objects that are being

used to depict the service station for various business applications.
Check which storage location and plant your location is linked to.
Scroll down to Storage location assignment for material movement.
The plant and the storage location are displayed.

3. What is the stock quantity for DIESEL-SSR at your storage location ST##
and at the plant 1104.
ST##: ________________________
1104: ________________________
a) Link the service station definition to other system objects that are being

used to depict the service station for various business applications.
Choose Storage location detail.
In the dialog box displayed, select the dialog for storage location.
Select Storage location stock overview.
Enter:
Material: DIESEL-SSR
Choose Execute.
The system displays a stock overview for your selected plant and
storage location.

Task 4:
On the basis of strategic decisions, the person responsible for payment cards has
decided which payment cards should be accepted at the newly acquired location,
and has told you the names of these cards. The cards include several standard
credit cards, such as MasterCard and VISA, and fleet cards.
1. Assign these card types to the location:

Payment card type: MAST
Valid from: (1st day of the current month)
BL Check amount: 150 EUR
CH Check amount: 300

Continued on next page

422 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Payment card type: VISA
Valid from: (1st day of the current month)

Let the system default the values for BL Check amount and CH Check
amount.
Where are these check amounts defaulted from?
______________________________________________________
a) Define which payment card types should be accepted at the location.

Assign two card types to the location.
Choose the PC tab.
Choose Create
Enter:

Payment card type: MAST
Valid from: (1st day of the current month)
Black list check amount: 150 EUR
Clearing house check amount: 300

Repeat this for card type VISA:

Payment card type: VISA
Valid from: (1st day of the current month)

If you now choose Enter, the BL Check amount and the CH Check
amount are automatically defaulted from the assignment of payment
card type to company code (Customizing).
Accept the proposed entries.

Task 5:
You will verify that the partner role and the customer linked to your business
location are correct.
1. Check the partner role for fuels operator and the customer ID for that partner

role. Note the partner role and partner ID.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 423



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

______________________________________________________
a) Verify that the partner role and the customer linked to your business

location are correct.
Check the partner role and the customer.
Choose the Roles tab.
The partner role is OPFU (OPERATOR FUELS) and the customer is
STATION-##.

2. Display the address of the customer assigned as a fuels operator to
STATION-##, and check if the link to the service station location has been
created.
To do this, you choose Display Partner in the Change Partner Role screen.
a) Verify that the partner role and the customer linked to your business

location are correct.
Check the link to the location within the address view of the customer
master record.
Select the line with the partner role OPFU and choose Partner detail.
In the dialog box displayed, select the dialog for G1.
Select Display general customer.
The Display customer: General data screen appears.
Choose the Address tab and scroll down to Business location
assignment.
The business location ID and the location type are displayed.
Choose Back.

Task 6:
Site control parameters record site information that is used to control or influence
bulk logistical processes such as delivery planning, shipment scheduling and
unloading operations.
1. Change the opening hours for Sundays and holidays to:

Continued on next page

424 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Morning: 10:00 (Opening time)
Afternoon: 22:00 (Closing time)

a) Maintain site control parameters.
Change the opening hours.
Choose the SCP tab.
Change the opening hours for Sundays and holidays to:

Morning: 10:00 (Opening time)
Afternoon: 22:00 (Closing time)

Task 7:
To enable the processes of invoicing the dealer on the basis of sales meter readings
and of updating book stock, you need to register the locationís sales meter devices
and tanks respectively. You do this by creating a set of meters and storage object
characteristics for the location.
1. Create a characteristic set for a gasoline tank at the location

Storage object type: TANK_50000
Sequence number.: TANK_S1

a) Create a characteristic set describing a gasoline tank at the location.
Choose the SOC tab
Choose Insert line.
The Storage object type and class dialog box appears.
Enter:

Storage object type: TANK_50000

Choose Enter.
The Create Business location: TANK_LIQUID: Detail screen appears.
Enter:

Sequence number: TANK_S1

Choose Back.
Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 425



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

2. Assign a material to the gasoline tank.

Material: SUPER-SSR
Start date: (1st day of the current month)

a) Creating a set of storage object characteristics and meters for the
location.
Assign a material to the gasoline tank.
Select the line with the newly created tank.
Choose Time dependent assignments.
The Change Business location: TANK_LIQUID: Assignments screen
appears.
Choose Assign material.
The Assign new material to storage object dialog box appears.
Enter:

Material: SUPER-SSR
Start date: (1st day of the current month)

Choose Back.
Save your changes.

3. Define a meter that captures the sales volume (for a material) from the
location

Material: SUPER-SSR
Service type: SELF
Date valid from: (1st day of the current month)
Sequence number.: Meter_S1
Meter description: Meter of group-##
Number of digits: 8
Conversion factor: 1
Volume unit of measure L

Continued on next page

426 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Remember that meters are assigned at business type level.
a) Define a meter that captures the sales volume (for a material) from

the location.
Go to the Change Business Location: Initial Screen.
Your location ID will be defaulted.
Choose the business type FUL1.
Choose the Meter tab.
Choose Insert line.
The Meter type dialog box appears
Enter:

Material: SUPER-SSR
Service type: SELF
Date valid from: (1st day of the current month)

Choose Enter.
The Create Meter Characteristics ñ Basic data screen appears.
Enter:

Sequence no.: Meter_S1
Meter description: Meter of group-##
No of digits: 8
Conversion factor: 1
Volume unit of measure L

Choose Enter.
Choose Back.

Task 8:
You wish to assign a second competitor station to your service station, and
maintain data describing this relationship.
Remember that competitors are assigned at business type level.
1. Assign a competitor

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 427



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Location ID: COMP02-##
Distance 50
Unit of measure M
Date valid from: (1st day of the current month)

a) Assign a second competitor station to your service station.
Assign a competitor at the business type level FUL1.
Choose the Competitor tab.
Choose Insert line.
Enter:

Location ID: COMP02-##
Distance: 50
UoM: M
Date valid from: (1st day of the current month)

Choose Enter.
2. You want to see more details of competitor COMP02-##. Select the

appropriate line and choose Competitor details.
Select Change competitor location (General).
Note the payment cards accepted at the competitor location.
______________________________________________________
a) Assign a second competitor station to your service station.

Display details of competitor COMP02-##.
Select the line with COMP02-## and choose Competitor detail.
In the dialog box displayed, select the dialog for the business location:
Select Change Competitor Location (General).
The Change Business Location: Address screen appears.
Choose the PC tab.
The accepted cards are displayed.

428 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Fuel Management

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain what is Service Station and Convenience Retailing (SSCR) solution
ï Which parties are involved in the Service Station and Convenience Retailing

(SSCR) business?
ï Which data is transmitted from and to the parties involved?
ï Explain the master data concept
ï Create a business location
ï Create master data at the general level
ï Assign a material handling group and a processing profile to a location
ï Create master data at the business type level

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 429



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Lesson: Service Station Retailing
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain how to handle complex pricing structure within the
SSCR retail network. Display and maintain target prices at the location level for
defined groups of materials and material /service type combinations and track
price changes.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Explain the flexibility of pricing within SSR
ï Maintain relevant pricing master data
ï Maintain prices based on the competitor prices
ï Describe network and group pricing
ï Explain the reports on fuels pricing.

Business Example
You work in the VOIL DE Companyís retail network department. You are
responsible for fuels pricing. You receive competitor prices for the fuels sold at
competitor locations. You want to enter these prices and have the system propose
new target prices for your own station. You change the prices for the service
station.
In addition to maintaining and updating prices based on individual locations,
location clusters, and competitors, network/group price update also allows
free-form price changes to be made to any single one or set of locations the
user selects.

Fuels Pricing ñ Process Overview
This graphic shows an overview of the business processes involved in pricing
management.

430 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 431



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 176: Fuels Pricing - Process Overview

ï Before the fuels pricing process starts, some prerequisites have to be
considered. At the oil company, service station data is maintained in location
master records. Specific data that relates to pricing maintenance includes:
definition of the location cluster that the station belongs to (optional),
material price differences group, service type differences group, and
competitors. In addition, price differences between materials, service types,
competitors, and locations are maintained. Standard pricing and network
pricing are also maintained at the oil company.

ï Using intermediate documents (IDocs), service stations send actual prices
(which are transmitted with the regular meter readings) and competitors' fuel
prices to the ERP System. The information may first be integrated into
a separate system at the oil company and then sent to the ERP System, or
the individual stations may send data directly to the ERP System. For those
locations that are not electronically linked to head office, these prices can be
entered into R/3 manually.

ï Price checks compare the inbound actual prices with the target prices in
R/3, to see if they are the same or if they fall within the defined acceptable
tolerance.

ï Competitor prices are uploaded to the pricing table and are used as the basis
for price proposals. Two dimensional pricing proposals based on the user's
entries are then made. The user can copy and save the proposals, which
then become target prices.

ï Finally, the new target prices are sent to the service stations' POS system
using IDocs.

Price Upload / Download
SSR offers automatic inbound and outbound processing of prices between the oil
company and the service stations using IDocs. SSR also offers inbound processing
using the SSR Store.

432 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Figure 177: Price Upload / Download

To update service station target prices, you create and send an IDoc to an external
system. You can choose from the following:
ï A general update
ï An update of prices that have changed
ï You can use job control to update prices automatically.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 433



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Price Differences ñ Material

Figure 178: Price Differences - Material

ï Within material and service type price difference groups you can maintain
differences in relation to the defined reference material and service type.
When you copy a price using the two-dimensional price maintenance tool,
the difference is included in the new price proposal.

ï Here, regular gasoline is used as the basis for the price differences. All
other materials have their price differences based on the price for regular
gasoline. For each material differences pricing group, a different referential
material within the group can be maintained, but only one from each group
can serve as the reference.

434 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Price Differences ñ Service Type

Figure 179: Price Differences - Service Type

ï This example shows price differences by service type. Here, self service
is the basis for the price differences. All other service types have their
price differences based on the price for self service. For each service type
differences pricing group, a different service type within the group can be
maintained, but only one from each group can serve as the reference.

Price Differences: Location Cluster
A location cluster is a group of service stations that share characteristics that allow
them to be grouped together for pricing purposes. For example, a cluster may
include all locations within a region, or locations that share the same competitors.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 435



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 180: Price Differences: Location Cluster

ï SSR provides a price maintenance screen that allows you to display and
maintain prices for a location and copy changes for the location to the other
locations in the cluster, applying any differences defined in pricing master
data maintenance.

ï You can create a group of locations with price differences based on
comparisons between locations, at a general and material and service type
level.

436 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Price Differences ñ Competitors

Figure 181: Price Differences - Competitors

ï You define differences between prices at your location and its competitors to
enable the two-dimensional price maintenance tool to propose prices based
on a fixed offset between your prices and those of your competitors.

ï You can maintain differences at a general level for all materials or for each
material sold at your location.

ï Business background: in general you assign several competitors to one
location of your cluster. Those competitors are in competition with the
whole cluster.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 437



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Price Differences ñ Competitors and Material

Figure 182: Price Differences - Competitors and Material

438 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Competitor Pricing ñ Business Case

Figure 183: Competitor Pricing - Business Case

ï Each service station partner is obliged to monitor and check prices of
competitors in the vicinity of its own location. New competitor prices are sent
to the oil company using the IDocs (ALE), manual entry, or another medium.

ï At the oil company, new prices are calculated using the two-dimensional
pricing tool and the competitor prices sent.

ï New prices are then sent back to the service stations using IDocs, or in some
cases using fax or telephone.

Competitor Pricing ñ Price Calculation
SSR provides a price maintenance screen that allows you to display and maintain
prices at competitor locations and copy these to your locations, applying any
differences defined in pricing master data maintenance.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 439



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 184: Competitor Pricing - Price Calculation

ï In this example, competitor differences are maintained on material level so
the new fuels prices for your own location show differences of:
ñ EUR -0.01 for Regular-SSR
ñ EUR -0.01 for Super-SSR
ñ EUR -0.01 for Midgrade-SSR
ñ EUR -0.02 for Diesel-SSR

Network and Group Pricing
In addition to maintaining and updating prices based on individual locations,
location clusters, and competitors, you can use a network or group price update
for widespread and free-form price changes for any single location or a set of
locations that the user selects. You can change any prices for any material and
location combination selected.

440 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Figure 185: Network and Group Pricing

ï This tool is useful where there is a standard price change for all stations
within a company, country, region, or city, for example, for one or more
materials and/or service types. An example would be a price rise of EUR
0.06/liter due to higher taxes on fuels.

ï The tool is also useful for making individual changes to materials at locations
where the price change is independent of the pricing differences defined for
a material and service type, location cluster, or competitor.

ï In the price change proposal, you can specify price ranges in which the new
price must fall before it is accepted.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 441



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Reports on Fuels Pricing (1)

ï Price History Report
ñ Allows you to view price changes within a specified period, and shows

you whether actual prices received with meter readings are different
from the valid target price.

ï Price Check Report
ñ Allows you to view price changes within a specified period, and shows

you whether the last actual prices received with price upload were
different from the valid target price.

ï Network Prices at a Special Time
ñ Allows you to view prices at a specified date and time across the whole

network (all locations, all materials, all service types).
ï Network Price Changes

ñ Allows you to view the number of price changes for a specific period
for the whole network.

Reports on Fuels Pricing (2)

ï Network Average Price By Date
ñ Allows you to view network average prices by date.

ï Network Average Price By Location
ñ Allows you to view network average price by location.

ï Price Change For Location Network
ñ Allows you to view prices that have changed for a given location

network.

442 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Exercise 13: Station Fuel Pricing
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Maintain material and group price difference
ï Maintain prices based on competitor prices
ï Create prices for your own Location

Business Example
You work in the VOIL Companyís retail network department. You receive
competitor prices for the fuels sold at competitor locations COMP01-## and
COMP02-##, which are competitors of your location LOCAT-##. You want to
maintain these prices and have the system propose new target prices for your
own station prices.

Task 1:
If this ExerciseStep should contain steps that the participant will perform, enter
a StepStatement. A required StepSolution will be inserted for you once you've
inserted a StepStatement. Or, if you would like to ask the participant a question,
insert one of the question types. If you want to insert another StepStatement or
question, insert another ExerciseStep.
Maintain fuel prices according the market situation and fuel typeís dependencies.
1. As you are responsible for fuels pricing, you want to check the current

material price differences, maintain competitor differences, display
competitor prices and create fuels prices for your own location in your ERP
System.
Display material price differences in the pricing master data for the material
difference price group GASOL_DE.
Note the differences in relation to the reference material REGULAR-SSR.

DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________

2. Maintain the competitor differences for business type FUL1 in the pricing
master data for your location LOCAT-##.
Enter the following rates:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 443



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

COMP01-##: 1- EUR per 100L
COMP02-##: 3- EUR per 100L
Save your entries.

3. Are any competitor prices currently maintained? Use the SSR fuels pricing
maintenance screen to check these prices.
Location number: LOCAT-##
Pricing date: (Todayís date)
Time for time-based pricing: (Do not change the proposed value)
List variant: 01
Service type: SELF
Note your competitors' fuel prices.
COMP01-##:

DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________
REGULAR-SSR: __________________________________

COMP02-##:

DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________
REGULAR-SSR: __________________________________

4. Create fuel prices for your own location. Use the Competitor pricing ñ
Create price calculation screen.
Enter:

REGULAR-SSR: 203
SUPER-SSR: 213
MIDGRADE-SSR: 208
DIESEL-SSR: 173

Save your entries.
Continued on next page

444 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Task 2:
You are now the service station partner. Your location's competitors are changing
their fuel prices. You have to note the new prices and set them in the ERP System.
1. Create fuel prices for competitors of your own location LOCAT-##. Use the

Competitor pricing ñ Create price calculation screen.
Location number: LOCAT-##
Pricing date: (Todayís date)
Time for time-based pricing: (Do not change the proposed value)
List variant: 01
Service type: SELF
Enter the competitor prices:
COMP01-##:

SUPER-SSR: 211
DIESEL-SSR: 171
MIDGRADE-SSR: 206
REGULAR-SSR: 201

COMP02-##:

SUPER-SSR: 212
DIESEL-SSR: 171
MIDGRADE-SSR: 207
REGULAR-SSR: 202

Choose Enter.
Save your entries.

Task 3:
You are now the person responsible for fuels pricing again. You want to check if
the competitor prices are available in your ERP System and use the competitor
prices to generate new target price proposals.
1. Check if the competitor prices are in the ERP System. (exercise 1.2.1) are

now displayed on the price maintenance screen.
Have the prices been maintained correctly?

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 445



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

__________________________________________________________
2. Let the ERP System propose new target prices based on the competitor prices

of COMP01-## for your location LOCAT-##.
Note the new fuels prices for your own location.

REGULAR-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________

MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________

You want to accept the price proposals for REGULAR-SSR, DIESEL-SSR
and MIDGRADE-SSR but decrease the price for SUPER-SSR by 0,01 EUR.
Enter:
Change reason code: 01
Change reason description: (Enter a suitable description)
Choose Enter.
Save your entries.
The Change reason code can be used for reporting purposes.

3. Compare the prices with the prices that you entered in exercises 1-1-4. How
were these new prices calculated?
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

446 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Solution 13: Station Fuel Pricing
Task 1:
If this ExerciseStep should contain steps that the participant will perform, enter
a StepStatement. A required StepSolution will be inserted for you once you've
inserted a StepStatement. Or, if you would like to ask the participant a question,
insert one of the question types. If you want to insert another StepStatement or
question, insert another ExerciseStep.
Maintain fuel prices according the market situation and fuel typeís dependencies.
1. As you are responsible for fuels pricing, you want to check the current

material price differences, maintain competitor differences, display
competitor prices and create fuels prices for your own location in your ERP
System.
Display material price differences in the pricing master data for the material
difference price group GASOL_DE.
Note the differences in relation to the reference material REGULAR-SSR.

DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________

a) You check the current differences and prices, and create fuels prices
for your own location in your ERP System.
To display material price differences, choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing
→ Pricing→ Master data→ Processing defaults→ Material and
Service Type Differences
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Material difference price group: GASOL_DE
Reference material: REGULAR-SSR
Choose Enter.
The differences for the dependent materials are:

DIESEL-SSR: 3,00-
MIDGRADE-SSR: 0,50
SUPER-SSR: 1,00

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 447



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

2. Maintain the competitor differences for business type FUL1 in the pricing
master data for your location LOCAT-##.
Enter the following rates:
COMP01-##: 1- EUR per 100L
COMP02-##: 3- EUR per 100L
Save your entries.
a) To maintain the competitor differences in the pricing master data,

choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Pricing→ Master data→ Competitor Differences
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Business type: FUL1
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Choose Enter.
Choose the Competitor tab.
Enter the following differences at the general level:
COMP01-##: 1,00-
COMP02-##: 3,00-
Save your entries.

3. Are any competitor prices currently maintained? Use the SSR fuels pricing
maintenance screen to check these prices.
Location number: LOCAT-##
Pricing date: (Todayís date)
Time for time-based pricing: (Do not change the proposed value)
List variant: 01
Service type: SELF
Note your competitors' fuel prices.
COMP01-##:

Continued on next page

448 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________
REGULAR-SSR: __________________________________

COMP02-##:

DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________
REGULAR-SSR: __________________________________

a) To check the current competitor price in the following way, choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Pricing→ Pricing
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location number: LOCAT-##
Pricing date: (Todayís date)
Time for time-based pricing: (Do not change the proposed value)
List variant: 01
Service type: SELF
Choose Execute.
The Create Price Calculation screen appears.
The system displays a matrix, with materials in the columns and
competitor locations and your own location in the rows.
As you haven't maintained any competitor prices, the fields are blank.

4. Create fuel prices for your own location. Use the Competitor pricing ñ
Create price calculation screen.
Enter:

REGULAR-SSR: 203
SUPER-SSR: 213
MIDGRADE-SSR: 208
DIESEL-SSR: 173

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 449



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Save your entries.
a) To enter your current meter prices, enter the following values in the

OWN location row of the matrix on the Create Price Calculation
screen:

REGULAR-SSR: 203
SUPER-SSR: 213
MIDGRADE-SSR: 208
DIESEL-SSR: 173

Save your entries.

Task 2:
You are now the service station partner. Your location's competitors are changing
their fuel prices. You have to note the new prices and set them in the ERP System.
1. Create fuel prices for competitors of your own location LOCAT-##. Use the

Competitor pricing ñ Create price calculation screen.
Location number: LOCAT-##
Pricing date: (Todayís date)
Time for time-based pricing: (Do not change the proposed value)
List variant: 01
Service type: SELF
Enter the competitor prices:
COMP01-##:

SUPER-SSR: 211
DIESEL-SSR: 171
MIDGRADE-SSR: 206
REGULAR-SSR: 201

COMP02-##:

Continued on next page

450 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

SUPER-SSR: 212
DIESEL-SSR: 171
MIDGRADE-SSR: 207
REGULAR-SSR: 202

Choose Enter.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 451



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Save your entries.
a) You are now the service station partner. Your location's competitors

are changing their fuel prices. You have to note the new prices and set
them in the ERP System.
To maintain the current competitor price, choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Pricing→ Pricing
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location number: LOCAT-##
Pricing date: (Todayís date)
Time for time-based pricing: (Do not change the proposed value)
List variant: 01
Service type: SELF
Choose Execute.
The Create Price Calculation screen appears.
Enter the competitor prices in the matrix. The currency, the price unit
and the quantity unit are defaulted from price maintenance.
COMP01-##:

SUPER-SSR: 211
DIESEL-SSR: 171

MIDGRADE-SSR: 206
REGULAR-SSR: 201

COMP02-##:

SUPER-SSR: 212
DIESEL-SSR: 171
MIDGRADE-SSR: 207
REGULAR-SSR: 202

Save your entries.

Continued on next page

452 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Task 3:
You are now the person responsible for fuels pricing again. You want to check if
the competitor prices are available in your ERP System and use the competitor
prices to generate new target price proposals.
1. Check if the competitor prices are in the ERP System. (exercise 1.2.1) are

now displayed on the price maintenance screen.
Have the prices been maintained correctly?

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 453



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

__________________________________________________________
a) You are now the person responsible for fuels pricing again.

To check if the competitor prices are available in your ERP System,
choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Pricing→ Pricing
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location number: LOCAT-##
Pricing date: (Todayís date)
Time for time based pricing: (Do not change the proposed value)
List variant: 01
Service type: SELF
Choose Execute.
The Create Price Calculation screen appears.
The system now displays the matrix with the competitor prices that you
entered in exercise 1.2.1:
COMP01-##:

REGULAR-SSR: 201
SUPER-SSR: 211
MIDGRADE-SSR: 206
DIESEL-SSR: 171

COMP02-##:

REGULAR-SSR: 202
SUPER-SSR: 212
MIDGRADE-SSR: 207
DIESEL-SSR: 171

2. Let the ERP System propose new target prices based on the competitor prices
of COMP01-## for your location LOCAT-##.
Note the new fuels prices for your own location.

Continued on next page

454 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

REGULAR-SSR: __________________________________
SUPER-SSR: __________________________________

MIDGRADE-SSR: __________________________________
DIESEL-SSR: __________________________________

You want to accept the price proposals for REGULAR-SSR, DIESEL-SSR
and MIDGRADE-SSR but decrease the price for SUPER-SSR by 0,01 EUR.
Enter:
Change reason code: 01
Change reason description: (Enter a suitable description)
Choose Enter.
Save your entries.
The Change reason code can be used for reporting purposes.
a) You let the system propose new target prices based on the prices of

COMP01-## in the following way:
Position the cursor on any pricing cell in the first competitor line
(COMP01-##).
Choose Copy and Paste.
The new fuels prices for your own location are displayed in red.

REGULAR-SSR: 200
SUPER-SSR: 210
MIDGRADE-SSR: 205
DIESEL-SSR: 170

Decrease the price for SUPER-SSR by 0,01 EUR
Enter the change reason code 01 (Competitorís Price). You can also
use the F4 help to display the possible entries.
Enter a suitable description for the change reason.
Choose Enter.
Save your entries.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 455



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

3. Compare the prices with the prices that you entered in exercises 1-1-4. How
were these new prices calculated?
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
a) These new prices were calculated using the competitor differences for

COMP01-## (-1 EUR per 100L), which you entered in exercise 1.1.2.

456 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Service Station Retailing

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain the flexibility of pricing within SSR
ï Maintain relevant pricing master data
ï Maintain prices based on the competitor prices
ï Describe network and group pricing
ï Explain the reports on fuels pricing.

Related Information
More information on the possible settings for the master data and organizational
elements from the SCM view point is provided in Documentation for mySAP ERP
which is available on http://help.sap.com.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 457



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain how the Oil companies use sales meter readings to
calculate fuel sales volumes and dip readings to calculate stock levels of bulk fuels
within the service station network. You also will see how to use that data to correct
current stock levels and run billing process based on meter reading to calculate the
amount to claim from service station partners for fuel sold at a location.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Describe the meter reading process
ï Maintain meter reading master data
ï Describe the performed checks during the upload process
ï Explain the meter reading error maintenance
ï Perform meter reading maintenance
ï Describe the dip reading process
ï Maintain storage object master data
ï Describe the checks during upload process
ï Explain the dip reading error maintenance
ï Post stock corrections

Business Example
You work in the VOIL DE Companyís retail network department. You will:
ï Receive meter reading data from the service station, which must be checked

and uploaded
ï Update meter readings manually
ï Check and release meter reading errors
ï Reprocess the remaining meter readings
ï Create subsequent material movements to update stock levels
ï Receive dip reading data from the service stations which must be uploaded

and checked
ï Process the errors contained in the data and update the dip readings history
ï Analyze the deviation between physical and book stocks to generate

correcting material movements
ï Post the material movements

458 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Meter Reading Process Overview
From the meter readings, quantities of fuel sold are calculated and used as the
basis for recording material movements, stock levels, and service station partner
(SSP) invoicing.

Figure 186: Meter Reading Process Overview

ï Business location master data maintenance: Each business location has
meters assigned to it according to material or material and service type.

ï Meter readings upload: Meter readings with the corresponding sales prices
are uploaded electronically from the service station through an integration
system or from individual service stations. If service stations have no
electronic link to the oil company, the meter reading data can be transmitted
using the SSR Store. Mandatory checks and user-defined checks are
performed on the readings.

ï All correct and reprocessed meter readings are then uploaded to the meter
reading history table and are assigned a link number to link the business
transaction to the subsequent processes.

Master Data Maintenance
ï You can assign the meter access profile and maintain the parameters of each

meter in the business location master data screen for meter assignments.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 459



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 187: Master Data Maintenance

ï The meter access profile selected under the meter definition defines the
criteria used to differentiate the incoming meter readings, for example, by
date, time, or material.

ï The parameter you define can include the length (number of digits) in the
meter reading, conversion factor, volume measure, meter serial number,
and model number. If a location changes or adds meters, you can define a
validity period to the meters. You can also specify whether more than one
meter is being accessed for each material at a location.

Periodic Upload and Checks of Meter Reading Data
When the meter reading data is uploaded, the system carries out mandatory and
user-defined checks.

460 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Figure 188: Periodic Upload and Checks of Meter Reading Data

ï User-defined checks prevent further processing of meter readings until you
review the data and then release it for reprocessing. User-defined check are
maintained in Customizing using Business Add-Ins (BAdIs).

ï The mandatory check location basic data consists of a set of basic checks,
such as:
ñ Do the locations exist?
ñ Does the station exists for the business type?
ñ Are meters linked to the location?

Meter Reading Process Overview ñ Errors
This process overview shows uploaded meter readings with errors.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 461



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 189: Meter Reading Process Overview - Errors

ï Errors can be reprocessed in a background process that rechecks the
erroneous meter readings. This is useful, for example, when the oil company
receives incomplete meter readings (only 4 of 5 meters) and the missing
meter readings are transmitted with the next upload. The background process
can process the complete meter readings.

ï Manual meter reading error maintenance is a dialog process that allows you
to analyze, release, delete, and correct the meter readings that have not been
processed. You can update or simulate the non-processed meter readings.

ï All correct and reprocessed meter readings are then uploaded to the meter
reading history table and are assigned a link number to link the business
transaction to the subsequent processes.

ï From the meter readings, quantities of fuel sold are calculated and used as
the basis for recording material movements, stock levels, and SSP invoicing.

ï Authorized users can clear the last meter reading received from the history
table. This may be necessary, for example, if the same readings have been
received twice, if there is an error with the upload, or if the previous dayís
upload was missed. This allows the previous dayís meter reading to be
re-uploaded.

462 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Meter Reading Error Maintenance

Figure 190: Meter Reading Error Maintenance

ï All readings that meet one or more criteria defined in the mandatory or
user-defined checks are rejected and require user action. There are three
options available for each rejected reading:
ñ Reprocess
ñ Release (for user-defined checks)
ñ Delete

ï The error maintenance screen allows you to review the rejected meter
readings and to drill down for further detail to determine the cause of the
rejected reading.

ï Errors from the mandatory checks are assigned a red light.
ï Errors from the user-defined checks are assigned either a yellow light (for

blocking type errors) or a red light (for all other errors).
ï The status lights indicate the following:

ñ Yellow light errors can be either deleted or released.
ñ Red light errors can either be reprocessed (once the cause of the

problem has been fixed, for example, with Customizing or master
data errors) or they can be deleted.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 463



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Meter Reading Process Overview ñ Manual

Figure 191: Meter Reading Process Overview - Manual

ï If meter readings cannot be received from service stations through the
interface for meter reading upload, you can enter meter readings manually.

ï The system processes manually entered readings in the same way as meter
readings uploaded from service stations.

ï All correct and reprocessed meter readings are then uploaded to the meter
reading history table and are assigned a link number to link the business
transaction to the subsequent processes.

ï From the meter readings, quantities of fuel sold are calculated and used as
the basis for recording material movements, stock levels, and SSP invoicing.

Dip Reading ñ Process Overview
Oil companies use dip readings to get the physical stock levels of bulk fuels within
the service station network. You can use this data to correct the logical book
stock levels.

464 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Figure 192: Dip Reading - Process Overview

ï Dip readings are received electronically from the service station, through an
integration system or from individual service stations.

ï All correct and reprocessed dip readings are then uploaded to the dip reading
history table.

ï Post stock corrections: The physical inventory, represented by incoming
dip readings, is compared with logical inventory, which is calculated using
standard material movements. If there are any differences, you can post the
differences with or without changing them into the document base table
(DBT).

ï Material movements: You can define and generate material movements
out of the DBT to adjust the differences between the logical stocks and the
dip readings.

Storage Object Characteristics
Storage object characteristics (SOC) are attributes that may influence logistical
processes associated with storage objects.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 465



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 193: Storage Object Characteristics

ï Bulk distribution requirements planning (BDRP) master data objects appear
in the system as sub-objects of other master data objects.

ï For each storage object, there are screens for basic specifications, time
dependent assignments, maintenance data and linear/ volumetric conversion
data.

466 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Master Data Maintenance

Figure 194: Master Data Maintenance

ï In the business location master data, general level, the following are assigned:
ñ The storage objects (tanks) are assigned to the locations
ñ The materials are assigned to the objects, as well as details about the

objects themselves.
ñ Further details are added for each tank including the material,

dimensions, and tank number.
ï A link to plant maintenance is also provided.

Checks During Dip Reading Upload
The system carries out the checks configured for the dip readings upload process.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 467



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 195: Checks During Dip Reading Upload

ï The mandatory and user-defined checks are performed when the dip reading
data is uploaded.

ï In Customizing, you can define your own checks as a control before the dip
reading data is processed. User-defined checks prevent further processing
of dip readings that meet the check criteria. You can first review the data
and then release it for reprocessing.

Dip Reading ñ Process Overview (2)
SSR allows you to process dip readings that have been rejected because they have
failed the defined plausibility checks.

468 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Figure 196: Dip Reading - Process Overview (2)

ï The errors can be reprocessed by a background process that re-checks the
erroneous dip readings.

ï Manual dip readings errors maintenance: This is a dialog process that allows
you to analyze, authorize, delete, and correct the dip readings that have
not been processed. It is possible to update or simulate the non processed
dip readings.

ï All correct and reprocessed dip readings are then uploaded to the dip reading
history table.

ï Post stock corrections: The physical inventory, represented by incoming
dip readings, is compared with the logical inventory, which is calculated
using standard material movements. If there are any differences, you can
post the differences with or without changing them into the document base
table (DBT).

ï Material movements: You can define and generate material movements
out of the DBT to adjust the differences between the logical stocks and the
dip readings.

ï Dip readings clearing: You can delete dip readings received from the
location in the past. This is only possible for dip readings not already used
to create goods movements.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 469



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Dip Reading Error Maintenance

Figure 197: Dip Reading Error Maintenance

ï All dip readings that meet one or more criteria defined in the mandatory or
user-defined checks will be rejected and will require user intervention. You
have three options available for each rejected reading:
ñ Reprocess
ñ Release (user-defined checks)
ñ Delete

ï The error maintenance screen allows you to review the rejected meter
readings and to drill down for further detail to determine the cause of the
rejected reading.

ï Errors from the mandatory checks are assigned a red light.
ï Errors from the user-defined checks are assigned either a yellow light (for

blocking type errors) or a red light (for all other errors).
ï The status lights indicate the following:

ñ Yellow light errors can be either deleted or released.
ñ Red light errors can either be reprocessed (once the cause of the

problem has been fixed, for example, with Customizing or master
data errors) or they can be deleted.

470 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Dip Reading ñ Process Overview (3)
In case of problems during the automatic transmission of the dip readings, the
service station partner can send the dip reading using fax or telephone.

Figure 198: Dip Reading - Process Overview (3)

ï If the dips are received using fax or telephone, the data has to be created
manually in the SAP system. For this purpose, the dip readings maintenance
function is used. It is a dialog process to update the dip readings manually.

ï All correct dip readings are then uploaded to the dip reading history table.
ï Post stock corrections and material movements are handled as in Process

Overview.

Stock Adjustment
You use dip readings received from business locations to determine the current
level of bulk fuel stocks held at those locations.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 471



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Figure 199: Stock Adjustment

ï If there is a difference between the physical and book stock level, which the
system determines from goods movements to and from the storage location,
you can save a stock adjustment to:
ñ Correct current stock levels in inventory management
ñ Create a goods movement based on dip readings

Fuels Dip Reading ñ Stock Report
The fuels dip reading stock report gives an overview of dip readings that were
different from the relative stock level at the time that they were received.

472 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Figure 200: Fuels Dip Reading - Stock Report

ï You can display:
ñ A status indicator. This has three possible colors:

ï Green indicates that the difference is less than the warning tolerance.
ï Yellow indicates that the difference is greater than the warning
tolerance but less than the error tolerance.
ï Red indicates that the difference is greater than the error tolerance.

ï These tolerances are assigned to the processing profile in Customizing.
ï Stock level data:

ñ Dip reading (physical stock)
ñ Relative (book) stock level at the time that the dip reading was received
ñ Difference between dip reading and book stock level
ñ Percentage deviation of dip reading from relative stock level, for

instance, for the last 30 days of sales flow. The parameters for the
percentage calculation are defined in a BAdI.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 473



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

474 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Exercise 14: Meter and Dip Reading
Management
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Maintain meter readings manually
ï Handle errors in uploaded meter readings
ï Display meter reading history data
ï Maintain dip readings ñ Create MM postings
ï Post stock corrections

Business Example
You work in the VOIL Company retail network department. You receive meter
reading data from your service stations per fax. The data must be entered manually
in your ERP System. You have to check and release pricing errors that are
determined from uploaded meter readings. Finally you create subsequent material
movements to update stock levels. Also you receive dip reading data from your
service station. You analyze the difference between physical and book stocks to
generate correcting material movements and post the material movements.

Task 1:
You receive meter reading data from your service stations. The data must be
entered in your ERP System.
1.
Enter meter readings manually in your ERP System. Use the maintain meter

reading function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Local date: (Previous day)
Local time: 23:00
Meter event type: A
Choose Enter.
Check the entries.
Where are the rates defaulted from?
____________________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 475



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

____________________________________

Note: To be displayed, prices for previous date must have been
entered.

2. Enter the following counts in the meter list:
DIESEL-SSR: 1000
MIDGRADE-SSR: 1500
REGULAR-SSR: 2500
SUPER-SSR: 2000
Save your entries.

3. Check the meter upload for errors.
Use the List and process errors function.
Enter:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
There should not be any error messages in the list on the right.
Go back.

Task 2:
You receive a fax containing another set of meter readings from your service
station partner. Enter these manually in the ERP System and check the meter
upload for errors.
1. Enter meter readings manually in your ERP System. Use the meter reading

maintain function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Local date: (Todayís date)
Local time: 09:00
Meter event type: A
Choose Enter.
Enter the following counts in the meter list:
DIESEL-SSR: 1500
MIDGRADE-SSR: 2500

Continued on next page

476 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

SUPER-SSR: 2800
REGULAR-SSR: 3700
Increase the rate for REGULAR-SSR by 1,00 EUR.
Save your entries.

2. Use the List and process errors function.
Enter:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Now there are error messages. These are indicated by a yellow traffic light
icon displayed in the list on the right.
You want to release the price difference error for reprocessing
Double-click any of the error messages with a yellow traffic light.
Release the meter readings with the error message Price difference with
target price and reprocess the readings.

3. You want to list the meter readings for the location that you maintained in
exercises 1.2 and 2.1.
Use the List meter reading history function.
Your Location ID LOCAT-## and the list variant 01 are defaulted.
Check the details of your two processes by choosing the Detail Data tab.

Task 3:
You will now run the material movement process, changing the stocks at the
service station according to the meter readings that you created in the previous
steps. This process will normally be started automatically once per night. The
meter reading upload process is a prerequisite of material movement creation and
stock adjustment from meter readings.
1. Before you run the stock adjustment process, you will check the current

stock for some of the materials for which you earlier created manual meter
readings and meter reading corrections.
Choose Logistics→ Material Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock overview
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SSR
Plant: 1104

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 477



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Storage location: ST##
Perform this step for all of your materials and note the stock quantities for
your materials:
REGULAR-SSR: ________________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________
DIESEL-SSR: ________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: ________________________

2. Now you will post adjustments to balance your stock on the basis of the
manually entered meter readings.
Choose Logistics→ Sales→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk Material
handling→ Material documents→ Create for meter readings
Enter:
Process execution date: (Previous date)
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Deactivate the checks (schedule check, location status check, process status
check).
Choose Execute.
Note the number of the MM document:
___________________________________

3. After you have created the material movement documents, you will check
the current stock for the material REGULAR-SSR.
Choose Logistics→ Material Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock overview
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SS
Plant: 1104
Storage location: ST##
Note the stock quantity for your material
REGULAR-SSR: ________________________
Compare your new stock with the stock noted down in task 3, step 1.

Continued on next page

478 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Task 4:
You want to examine the meter readings that you have already received. In
addition, you want to drill down from the meter reading history to the MM
document.
1. Examine the meter readings.

Choose List meter reading history.
Check if your location and the list variant 01 are proposed. If not, enter
these values.
Select one of your fuels meter processes and choose the Detail Data tab
at the bottom of the screen.
The detailed data for the meter readings is displayed. This includes: Meter
counter, quantity in L, price in EUR/100L and the amount.

2. Drill down to the MM documents.
Choose the Control Data tab at the bottom of the screen.
Which handling type and excise duty tax status are displayed in the MM
document?
Handling type:_______________________
Excise duty tax status:_______________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 479



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Task 5:
You are now the person responsible for Customizing for meter readings. You want
to check the Customizing settings within your ERP System.

1. Where in Customizing is the access profile defined?
What is controlled by the access profile?

2. Where are the defaults for the meter reading process defined?
Which end period meter event type is defaulted?

Task 6:
You receive dip reading data from your service station and analyze the difference
between physical and book stocks.
1. As you are responsible for material inventory, you want to check if the dip

readings have been transmitted successfully to your ERP System and analyze
the logical and physical stock level.
To do this, use the List and process errors function.
Enter:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
There should be no error messages in the list on the right.
Go back.

2. Analysis of logical and physical stock level.
The dip reading data updated in the dip reading history reflects the differences
between the stock level recorded in the system and the values received.
Use the Stocks control function.
Enter:

Continued on next page

480 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Every dip reading is qualified with a status based on the difference between
the received dip stock and the stock level in the system.
The status is evaluated using the deviation percentage and the tolerance
values defined in the processing profile:
ï Warning tolerance for gains
ï Error tolerance for gains
ï Warning tolerance for losses
ï Error tolerance for losses
The status light is:
Green when the deviation is less than the warning tolerance.
Yellow when the deviation is greater than the warning tolerance but less
than the error tolerance.
Red when the deviation is greater than the error tolerance. A minus sign
indicates a loss.
Otherwise the deviation is a gain.
Note the status and the difference quantity for your materials:
REGULAR-SSR: _____________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________
DIESEL-SSR: ________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: ____________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 481



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

3. Where can you find the warning and error tolerances (that is, the percentage
values) for gains and losses that apply to your location and what are the
current values?

Task 7:
You are going to run the material adjustment process. After processing the stock
correction for your service station, a material movement document will be created
in order to adjust your stock.
1. Let the system propose the adjustment quantity for your materials.

Use the Post stock correction function.
Enter: Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Note the related stock for your materials.
REGULAR-SSR: _____________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________
DIESEL-SSR: ________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: ____________________

2. Change the proposed difference quantities for REGULAR-SSR and
DIESEL-SSR and post the stock corrections.
What difference quantities are proposed by the system?
REGULAR-SSR: _____________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________
DIESEL-SSR: ________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: ____________________
Enter values that are less than the proposed difference quantities for
DIESEL-SSR and REGULAR-SSR.
Post these stock corrections by saving your entries.
Note the number of the MM document:
_________________________________

Continued on next page

482 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Check the MM document that you created by double-clicking the document
number.
What material temperature is used? Where is it defaulted from?
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
Choose Back.
Now compare the related stock with the related stock that you noted in task
2, step 2.
You can also display the related stock: Choose: Logistics→ Material
Management→ Inventory Management→ Environment→ Stock→ Stock
overview

Task 8:
You are now the person responsible for Customizing for dip readings. You want
to check the Customizing settings for the material documents within your ERP
System.

1. Where is the logistics document schema for the MM documents for meter
and dip readings defined?
What is defined by the logistics document schema?
Which logistic document type is defaulted?

2. How is the logistic document definition schema determined?
Where is the location indicator for the logistics document schema derived
from?

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 483



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Solution 14: Meter and Dip Reading
Management
Task 1:
You receive meter reading data from your service stations. The data must be
entered in your ERP System.
1.
Enter meter readings manually in your ERP System. Use the maintain meter

reading function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Local date: (Previous day)
Local time: 23:00
Meter event type: A
Choose Enter.
Check the entries.
Where are the rates defaulted from?
____________________________________

Continued on next page

484 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

____________________________________

Note: To be displayed, prices for previous date must have been
entered.

a) To enter meter readings manually in your ERP System, choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Bulk material handling→ Meter readings→ Maintain
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Local date: (Previous day)
Local time: 23:00
Meter event type: A
Choose Enter.
The rates are defaulted from pricing. The rates shown are the target
prices (for more information, see Exercise and Solutions for fuels
pricing).

2. Enter the following counts in the meter list:
DIESEL-SSR: 1000
MIDGRADE-SSR: 1500
REGULAR-SSR: 2500
SUPER-SSR: 2000
Save your entries.
a) Enter the following counts in the meter list:

DIESEL-SSR: 1000
MIDGRADE-SSR: 1500
REGULAR-SSR: 2500
SUPER-SSR: 2000
Choose Save.

3. Check the meter upload for errors.
Use the List and process errors function.
Enter:
Company code: 1100

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 485



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Business location ID LOCAT-##
There should not be any error messages in the list on the right.
Go back.
a) You check the meter upload for errors by choosing: Logistics→ Sales

and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk material handling
→ Meter readings→ List and process errors
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Choose Execute.
The Fuels meter readings: List and process errors screen appears.
There should be no errors messages in the list on the right.
Choose Back twice.

Task 2:
You receive a fax containing another set of meter readings from your service
station partner. Enter these manually in the ERP System and check the meter
upload for errors.
1. Enter meter readings manually in your ERP System. Use the meter reading

maintain function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Local date: (Todayís date)
Local time: 09:00
Meter event type: A
Choose Enter.
Enter the following counts in the meter list:
DIESEL-SSR: 1500
MIDGRADE-SSR: 2500
SUPER-SSR: 2800
REGULAR-SSR: 3700
Increase the rate for REGULAR-SSR by 1,00 EUR.

Continued on next page

486 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Save your entries.
a) To enter meter readings manually in your ERP System, choose:

Logistics→ ales and Distribution→ ervice Station Retailing→ Bulk
material handling→ Meter readings→ Maintain
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Local date: (Todayís date)
Local time: 09:00
Meter event type: A
Choose Enter.
Enter the following counts in the meter list:
DIESEL-SSR: 1500
MIDGRADE-SSR: 2500
SUPER-SSR: 2800
REGULAR-SSR: 3700
Increase the rate for REGULAR-SSR by 1,00 EUR.
Choose Save.

2. Use the List and process errors function.
Enter:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Now there are error messages. These are indicated by a yellow traffic light
icon displayed in the list on the right.
You want to release the price difference error for reprocessing
Double-click any of the error messages with a yellow traffic light.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 487



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Release the meter readings with the error message Price difference with
target price and reprocess the readings.
a) You check the meter upload for errors by choosing: Logistics→ Sales

and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk material handling
→ Meter readings→ List and process errors
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Choose Execute.
The Fuels meter readings: List and process errors screen appears.
Now there are error messages. These are indicated by a yellow traffic
light icon displayed in the list on the right. You notice that there is a
price difference within your meter readings. You release the price
difference error for reprocessing by double-clicking any of the error
messages with a yellow traffic light. Now select the line(s) of the meter
readings with the error message Price difference with target price and
choose Unlock record.
To reprocess the errors, choose Save. The message Rejected meter
readings have been re-processed appears in the footer line of the screen.
Choose Back twice.

3. You want to list the meter readings for the location that you maintained in
exercises 1.2 and 2.1.
Use the List meter reading history function.
Your Location ID LOCAT-## and the list variant 01 are defaulted.

Continued on next page

488 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Check the details of your two processes by choosing the Detail Data tab.
a) You list the meter readings for your location that you maintained in

Exercises 1.2 and 2.1 by choosing: Logistics→ Sales and Distribution
→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk material handling→ Information
system→ List meter reading history
The Fuels meter readings: List meter reading history screen appears.
Make sure that your location ID and the list variant 01 are defaulted.
Choose Enter
The Detail Data tab displays the details of your two processes,
including
ï Previous meter count
ï Meter counter
ï Quantity in L
ï Price in EUR / 100L
ï Amount

Task 3:
You will now run the material movement process, changing the stocks at the
service station according to the meter readings that you created in the previous
steps. This process will normally be started automatically once per night. The
meter reading upload process is a prerequisite of material movement creation and
stock adjustment from meter readings.
1. Before you run the stock adjustment process, you will check the current

stock for some of the materials for which you earlier created manual meter
readings and meter reading corrections.
Choose Logistics→ Material Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock overview
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SSR
Plant: 1104
Storage location: ST##
Perform this step for all of your materials and note the stock quantities for
your materials:
REGULAR-SSR: ________________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 489



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

DIESEL-SSR: ________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: ________________________
a) You check the current stock for some of the materials for which you

earlier created manual meter readings and meter reading corrections.
Choose Logistics→ Material Management→ Inventory Management
→ Environment→ Stock→ Stock overview
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SSR
Plant: 1104
Storage location: ST##
Choose Execute.
The Stock overview screen appears.
Perform this step for all of your materials and note the stock quantities
for your materials.

2. Now you will post adjustments to balance your stock on the basis of the
manually entered meter readings.
Choose Logistics→ Sales→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk Material
handling→ Material documents→ Create for meter readings
Enter:
Process execution date: (Previous date)
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Deactivate the checks (schedule check, location status check, process status
check).
Choose Execute.
Note the number of the MM document:

Continued on next page

490 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

___________________________________
a) Now you post adjustments to balance your stock on the basis of the

manually entered meter readings by choosing: Logistics→ Sales and
Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk Material handling→
Material documents→ Create for meter readings
The SSR Material document creation screen appears.
Enter:
Process execution date: (Previous date)
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Deactivate the checks (schedule check, location status check, process
status check).
Choose Execute.
Note the number of the MM document.

3. After you have created the material movement documents, you will check
the current stock for the material REGULAR-SSR.
Choose Logistics→ Material Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock overview
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SS
Plant: 1104
Storage location: ST##
Note the stock quantity for your material
REGULAR-SSR: ________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 491



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Compare your new stock with the stock noted down in task 3, step 1.
a) To check the current stock for the material REGULAR, choose:

Logistics→ Material Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Stock→ Stock overview
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SS
Plant: 1104
Storage location: ST##
Choose Execute.
The Stock overview screen appears.
The new stock shows now a difference of 3700L regarding to the meter
reading you created in task 1, step 2 and posted in task 3, step 2.

Task 4:
You want to examine the meter readings that you have already received. In
addition, you want to drill down from the meter reading history to the MM
document.
1. Examine the meter readings.

Choose List meter reading history.
Check if your location and the list variant 01 are proposed. If not, enter
these values.
Select one of your fuels meter processes and choose the Detail Data tab
at the bottom of the screen.
The detailed data for the meter readings is displayed. This includes: Meter
counter, quantity in L, price in EUR/100L and the amount.
a) You examine the meter readings by choosing: Logistics→ Sales and

Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk material handling→
Information system -> List meter reading history
Select one of your fuels meter processes and choose the Detail Data tab
at the bottom of the screen
The detailed data for the meter readings is displayed. This includes:
Meter counter, quantity in L, price in EUR/100L and the amount.

2. Drill down to the MM documents.
Choose the Control Data tab at the bottom of the screen.

Continued on next page

492 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Which handling type and excise duty tax status are displayed in the MM
document?
Handling type:_______________________
Excise duty tax status:_______________________
a) To drill down to the MM documents choose the Control Data tab at the

bottom of the screen. In the Material Movements area choose Display
first MM Document (the glasses icon).
The Display Material Document: Overview screen appears.
To check the handling type and excise duty tax status, select a line
item and choose Choose.
The handling type is 01 (full rate).
The exchange duty status is TA (taxed).

Task 5:
You are now the person responsible for Customizing for meter readings. You want
to check the Customizing settings within your ERP System.
1. Where in Customizing is the access profile defined?

What is controlled by the access profile?
Answer: The access profile is defined in: IMG→ Industry Solution Oil&Gas
(Downstream)→ SSR→ Fuels Processing→ Process configuration→
Define access profile
You link the business location to a meter access profile to:
1. Assign meters to a specific object combination (access type)
2. Define whether key duplicates are allowed or not for the selected

access type (key type).
3. Define whether the meter assignments are date and/or time dependent

(Date/time relevance)
2. Where are the defaults for the meter reading process defined?

Which end period meter event type is defaulted?
Answer: The defaults for the meter reading process are defined in the
processing profile. IMG Industry Solution Oil&Gas (Downstream)→ SSR
→ Basic settings→ Define Processing profile
The End period meter event type A is defaulted. This means that we expect a
meter reading of a normal sales flow from the service stations.
The time frame for the incoming end period meter reading is from 20:00 to
04:00.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 493



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Task 6:
You receive dip reading data from your service station and analyze the difference
between physical and book stocks.
1. As you are responsible for material inventory, you want to check if the dip

readings have been transmitted successfully to your ERP System and analyze
the logical and physical stock level.
To do this, use the List and process errors function.
Enter:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
There should be no error messages in the list on the right.
Go back.
a) To check the dip reading upload for errors, choose: Logistics→

Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk material
handling→ Dip readings→ List and process errors
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Choose Execute.
The Fuels dip readings: Error maintenance screen appears.
There should be no errors messages in the list on the right.
Choose Back twice.

2. Analysis of logical and physical stock level.
The dip reading data updated in the dip reading history reflects the differences
between the stock level recorded in the system and the values received.
Use the Stocks control function.
Enter:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Every dip reading is qualified with a status based on the difference between
the received dip stock and the stock level in the system.
The status is evaluated using the deviation percentage and the tolerance
values defined in the processing profile:

Continued on next page

494 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

ï Warning tolerance for gains
ï Error tolerance for gains
ï Warning tolerance for losses
ï Error tolerance for losses
The status light is:
Green when the deviation is less than the warning tolerance.
Yellow when the deviation is greater than the warning tolerance but less
than the error tolerance.
Red when the deviation is greater than the error tolerance. A minus sign
indicates a loss.
Otherwise the deviation is a gain.
Note the status and the difference quantity for your materials:
REGULAR-SSR: _____________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________
DIESEL-SSR: ________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: ____________________
a) To analyze the logical and physical stock level, choose: Logistics→

Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk material
handling→ Information system→ Stocks control
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Choose Execute.
The Fuels dip readings: Stocks report screen appears.
On the right side of the screen, the dip reading data is displayed.
You can see the status and the difference quantity for your materials.
Choose Back twice.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 495



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

3. Where can you find the warning and error tolerances (that is, the percentage
values) for gains and losses that apply to your location and what are the
current values?
Answer: The current warning and error tolerances for gain and loss are
contained within the processing profile.
To display the tolerances for your location, choose: Logistics→ Sales and
Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Master Data→ Location→
Display
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Business type: FUL1
Choose the Control Data tab.
Choose Processing profile details.
The Display processing profile box appears.
The tolerances are displayed in the Dip readings section.

Task 7:
You are going to run the material adjustment process. After processing the stock
correction for your service station, a material movement document will be created
in order to adjust your stock.
1. Let the system propose the adjustment quantity for your materials.

Use the Post stock correction function.
Enter: Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Note the related stock for your materials.
REGULAR-SSR: _____________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________
DIESEL-SSR: ________________________

Continued on next page

496 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

MIDGRADE-SSR: ____________________
a) To display the proposed adjustment quantities, choose: Logistics→

Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Bulk material
handling→ Dip readings→ Post stock correction
Enter:
Enter: Company code: 1100
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Choose Execute
The related stock for each material appears on the right side of the
screen.

2. Change the proposed difference quantities for REGULAR-SSR and
DIESEL-SSR and post the stock corrections.
What difference quantities are proposed by the system?
REGULAR-SSR: _____________________
SUPER-SSR: ________________________
DIESEL-SSR: ________________________
MIDGRADE-SSR: ____________________
Enter values that are less than the proposed difference quantities for
DIESEL-SSR and REGULAR-SSR.
Post these stock corrections by saving your entries.
Note the number of the MM document:
_________________________________
Check the MM document that you created by double-clicking the document
number.
What material temperature is used? Where is it defaulted from?
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
Choose Back.
Now compare the related stock with the related stock that you noted in task
2, step 2.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 497



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

You can also display the related stock: Choose: Logistics→ Material
Management→ Inventory Management→ Environment→ Stock→ Stock
overview
a) You change the proposed difference quantities for REGULAR-SSR and

DIESEL-SSR in the following way:
Double-click on one of the materials on the right side of the screen or
choose the tree on the left side of the screen.
Navigate within the tree to the dip reading history record (the document
icon) and double-click it.
The Fuels stock control: Post stock correction screen appears.
Enter values that are less than the proposed difference quantities for
DIESEL-SSR and REGULAR-SSR. You post these stock corrections
by saving your entries.
Note the number of the MM document. You check the MM document
by double-clicking on the MM document number.
The Display Material Document xxx: Overview screen appears.
You display the details by double-clicking an item.
Choose Additional quantities (the calculator icon).
The material temperature of 15C is displayed within the Quantity
conversion calculation box.
The material temperature is defaulted from:
1. Processing defaults (choose Logistics→ Sales and Distribution

→ Service Station Retailing→ Master data→ Material→
Processing defaults)

2. Quantity conversion interface parameter defaults (choose:
Logistics→ Material Management→ Inventory Management→
Environment→ Oil qty. conversion→ QCI parameter defaults
→ Create/Display/Delete/Activate default parameters)

3. The processing profile (choose IMG→ Industry Solution
Oil&Gas (Downstream)→ SSR→ Basic Settings→ Define
Processing Profile).

Continued on next page

498 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Meter and Dip Reading Management

Task 8:
You are now the person responsible for Customizing for dip readings. You want
to check the Customizing settings for the material documents within your ERP
System.
1. Where is the logistics document schema for the MM documents for meter

and dip readings defined?
What is defined by the logistics document schema?
Which logistic document type is defaulted?
Answer: The logistics document schema for the MM documents for
meter and dip readings is defined in: IMG→ Industry Solution Oil&Gas
(Downstream)→ SSR→ Fuels Processing→ Logistics document creation
→ Logistics document schema→ Define document schema
The logistics document schema defines the:
ï Logistics document type
ï Movement types to be used for material document creation
ï Fields to be filled for the document creation process (the document

key field indicates whether a new document or a new line is created
in a document)

The logistic document type ìWAî for goods issue is defaulted.
2. How is the logistic document definition schema determined?

Where is the location indicator for the logistics document schema derived
from?
Answer: The logistic document definition schema is determined in: IMG
→ Industry Solution Oil&Gas (Downstream)→ SSR→ Fuels Processing
→ Logistics document creation→ Logistics document schema→ Assign
document schema
The logistics document schema is assigned to the location indicator and to
the process. You can assign each logistics document schema to more than
one location indicator/process combination.
The process derives the location indicator from processing profile (Logistic
documents section) of the location. It uses this indicator to derive the
logistics document schema.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 499



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Describe the meter reading process
ï Maintain meter reading master data
ï Describe the performed checks during the upload process
ï Explain the meter reading error maintenance
ï Perform meter reading maintenance
ï Describe the dip reading process
ï Maintain storage object master data
ï Describe the checks during upload process
ï Explain the dip reading error maintenance
ï Post stock corrections

Related Information
More information on the possible settings for the master data and organizational
elements from the SCM view point is provided in Documentation for mySAP ERP
which is available on http://help.sap.com.

500 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner
Invoicing
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain how the oil companies handle service station payment
cards transactions, settle with clearing houses on behalf of service station partners
and with fleet card companies directly, invoice service station partners and reverse
service station partner billing documents.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Execute and control the payment card process including complaint processing
ï Explain the master data ñ three level concept
ï Describe the transaction upload process
ï Explain the splitting concept
ï Display, change, and create payment card transactions
ï Describe clearing house and fleet card company settlement
ï Create the service station partner invoice
ï Reverse the service station partner invoice
ï Analyze the service station partner invoice.

Business Example
The VOIL DE Company is responsible for maintaining payment card master
data and checking the uploaded payment card transaction data from the business
locations. After the upload the data should be checked with a report. Errors
during the upload can be corrected using a transaction. If the connection to a
service station breaks down, the payment card transactions can be manually
entered into the ERP System. The VOIL DE Company settles with clearing
houses and fleet card companies on behalf of the service station partners. For
company owned/dealer operated service stations it is usual to invoice the service
station partner for the cash sales of oil company owned products. The service
station partner receives payment from the customer for the sale of fuels and is
then invoiced by the oil company for the quantity sold. Payment card handling is
a service provided by the oil company to the partner. The oil company receives
the payment card transactions through the POS system and will deal with the
clearing houses on the partnerís behalf. Fleet card companies are invoiced as
normal customers by the oil company.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 501



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Payment Cards Overview

Figure 201: Payment Cards Overview

ï An end-customer purchases a product or a service at the service station
and wants to pay with a payment card, such as a fleet-card or credit-card
(arrow 1).

ï At the cashier, an authorization check is performed (arrow 2).
ï The black list may be sent from the clearing house to the oil company and

then distributed to the service stations. The black list is stored at the service
station or at the clearing house. For Eurocheque (EC) card transactions,
an online connection is made to the clearing house and the transaction is
checked. A new black list is sent by the clearing house regularly (a new list
is sent every month with corrections every week) to the oil companies.

ï If the result of the authorization is positive (arrow 3), the end customer
receives the products or services (arrow 4).

502 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Business Background ñ Upload and Settlement

Figure 202: Business Background - Upload and Settlement

ï All the payment card sales information (individual transaction data) is sent
periodically (daily) from the service station to the SAP ERP System of the
oil company (arrow 5).

ï At settlement time, the individual transaction data is sent from the ERP
System to the clearing house (arrow 6).

ï The clearing house validates the card transaction. Some clearing houses send
a summary of the settlement data to the oil company (arrow 7).

ï The clearing house then pays the purchase amount minus the clearing house
fee to the oil companyís bank account (arrow 8).

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 503



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Business Background ñ SSP Invoicing

Figure 203: Background - SSP Invoicing

ï The oil company sends an invoice to the service station partner for the sales
of oil company owned products by cash (arrow 9 ).

ï The oil company sends an payment request (arrow 10 ) to get the money
from the service station partners bank/account. (Usually the oil company has
direct access to the bank account of the service station partner).

ï The actual money transfer from the service station bank/account to the oil
companyís bank/account is shown by arrows 11 and 12.

The Clearing House as a New Object
The clearing house object is the central repository for all the information required
to execute clearing house and fleet card company settlement, and is used in the
payment card settlement processes. Different settlement runs are used for each
clearing house and payment card type combination.

504 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Figure 204: The Clearing House as a New Object

You can define the following for the clearing house object:
ï Customer master (SD) data.

Customer master data is used for SD documents (fee billing document, fleet
card company invoice) to link the ìSold-toî partner role and the sales area.

ï Financial accounting (FI) data.
Accounts that are used for automatic processing during the settlement run
and company code has to be assigned to each clearing house object. In the
case of credit card and bank debit card (such as EC cards) clearing houses,
you specify which CH receivables account and which cash clearing account
(both are general ledger accounts) are to be used in the settlement process.
Fleet card company settlement is not on the level of general ledger accounts.
During the settlement process, a SD invoice is created for the customer that
is linked to the clearing house object.

ï Controlling (CO) data.
You assign a CO distribution cycle to each clearing house so that the costs
associated with payment card handling can be distributed correctly.

ï Central address master data.
Central address data is used to store information about contacts.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 505



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Three Level Payment Card Concept
Payment card master data, such as card type and accepted payment card types, is
defined at three levels.

Figure 205: Three Level Payment Card Concept

ï At R/3 client level, there is a general definition for payment card types.
ï As settings for a payment card type often vary from country to country, card

types are further defined at company code level. This allows you to create the
same payment card type with different settings in different company codes.
Additional settings can also be made at the company code level, for example,
for purchase limits, material restrictions, and splitting indicators.

ï At the business location level, you can maintain the following data:
ñ Time frame that defines when the payment card type is accepted.
ñ Reason code explaining why the card type is temporarily not accepted.
ñ Amounts for when a purchase should be checked against a black list or

directly with the clearing house that is specific to the location.
ñ Location of the black list (required for complaint processing).

Payment Card Transaction Upload
Payment card transactions are uploaded from the service stations to the oil
company. This makes it possible to send the transaction data in several smaller
incoming IDocs.

506 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Figure 206: Payment Card Transaction Upload

After data is received at the oil company, the following checks and processes are
or can be started:
ï Basic checks such as checking that the card type is specified. Process control

checks are also performed at this time.
ï Validations based on different criteria defined by the oil company are also

performed.
ï If splitting is relevant, then split processing is executed and the split result is

stored with the transaction.
ï The clearing house object is determined, in order to prepare the transaction

for the settlement.
ï Finally, the process status is updated as ìfinished successfullyî.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 507



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Payment Card Splitting

Figure 207: Payment Card Splitting

In addition to normal clearing house determination using the condition technique,
it is also possible to use the payment card splitting function to determine a clearing
house based on specific splitting criteria. In some European countries, bank debit
cards can be settled with more than one clearing house, where for instance, the
clearing house is determined based on the card number and/or bank number.
The splitting criteria are customer definable, and are used during processing in the
splitting routine to evaluate the transaction, and obtain a splitting result.
Examples of splitting criteria are bank number, payment card number, business
location number and/or a fixed transaction amount.
The splitting result is stored in the detailed transaction file (DTF) and specifies the
result of the splitting processing, thus determining the clearing house to where
the transaction should be settled and/or transmitted.

508 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Manual Creation of Payment Card Transactions

Figure 208: Manual Creation of Payment Card Transactions

If the payment card transactions data cannot be sent automatically, for example,
because there is a failure of the POS system, payment card transaction data can be
created manually.
In this case, the service station partner sends the POS data using fax, mail, or any
other method to the oil company. At the oil company, the data has to be entered
manually into the SAP ERP System.
All functions or checks that are performed during normal upload are also carried
out.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 509



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Service Station Partner Invoicing ñ Overview

Figure 209: Service Station Partner Invoicing - Overview

SSR settlement and invoicing functionality allows an oil company to:
ï Create the billing documents required to invoice service station partners on

the following bases:
ñ Meter readings from pumps and payment card transactions received

from the POS system, or system.
ñ Cash information and payment card transactions received from the POS.

ï Create the billing documents required to settle cash and credit card
transactions with the service station partners.

ï Create the billing documents required to settle fleet card transactions with
the service station partners.

510 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Created Documents ñ Cash and Credit Cards

Figure 210: Created Documents - Cash and Credit Cards

Debit the dealerís account for the total cash sales of oil company owned products.
Debit the clearing house accounts for total credit card sales. The oil company will
be reimbursed for this amount during the credit card settlement when it claims
the money back from the credit card clearing house.
Credit the dealer for commission on his credit card and cash sales of oil company
owned products.
Charge the dealer a participation fee on credit card transactions. The participation
fee is the amount that the oil company charges the dealer for handling the credit
card transactions on their behalf.
In our template, the amount of company owned products sold by cash is calculated
as the difference between meter readings, and credit and fleet card transactions
per product.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 511



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Cash and Credit Card Document

Figure 211: Cash and Credit Card Document

The sales revenue for fuels sold by fleet cards (here 1,000.- EUR) is posted in
the fleet card settlement (see unit 7).
The participation fee for credit cards sales may differ between oil company owned
products and dealer owned products.
The follow on documents created may include:
ï FI accounting document
ï Profit center documents
ï CO-PA (profitability analysis)

512 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Created Documents ñ Fleet Cards

Figure 212: Created Documents - Fleet Cards

Credit the dealers' account for the sales of dealer owned products since, in the case
of fleet cards, the oil company has to buy the dealer owned products from the
dealer and ìsellî it to the fleet card company. The oil company will be reimbursed
for this amount during the fleet card settlement when claiming the money back
from the fleet card company.
Credit the dealer for commissions on oil company owned products sold by the
dealer on behalf of the oil company by fleet cards.
Charge the dealer a participation fee on fleet card transactions. The participation
fee is the amount that the oil company charges the dealer for handling the fleet
card transactions on their behalf.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 513



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Fleet Card Document

Figure 213: Fleet Card Document

The invoice to the service station partners contains two documents: one for sales
by credit card and cash and one for sales of dealer owned products by fleet card.
The service station partner is not invoiced for fleet card sales.
The service station partner invoice for fleet cards is only used to:
ï Credit the commission on sale of oil company owned products
ï Charge the participation fee for fleet cards
ï Credit the sales of dealer owned products paid for using fleet cards

Material Handling Group - Ownership of Products
Various characteristics, such as product ownership, are determined using the
material handling group attached to the business location.

514 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Figure 214: Material Handling Group - Ownership of Products

The billing treatment indicator is set for oil company owned products.
You assign material handling groups to business locations to enable the system
to determine whether a material is owned by the oil company (important for
a CODO relationship):
ï If Billing treatment is selected, the material is owned by the oil company, for

example, fuels.
ï If Billing treatment is not selected, the material is not owned by the oil

company, for example, shop products.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 515



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Analyzing the Service Station Invoicing

Figure 215: Analyzing the Service Station Invoicing

You can list partner invoices to:
ï Display data from billing documents created by the service station partner

invoicing process
ï Navigate to the billing documents themselves
Use the tree on the left side of the SAP screen to display:
ï Summarized billing data for:

ñ Period overviews (monthly)
ñ Daily overviews

ï Detailed daily information for a specific day for each service station partner,
such as:
ñ Fuels information
ñ Payment cards information
ñ Daily summary

ï Billing documents

516 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Exercise 15: Payment Cards and Service
Station Partner Invoicing
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Use the DTF transaction to display, change and create payment card

transactions
ï Create a service station partner invoice
ï Analyze a service station partner invoice

Business Example
You work in the VOIL Company and are responsible for checking the uploaded
payment card transaction data from your business locations. Also you wish to run
partner invoicing for a particular location and sales date.

Task 1:
You are responsible for checking the uploaded payment card transaction data from
your business locations. Unfortunately the POS system of your service station has
broken down and it will take a few days to repair it. You must enter the payment
card transactions for these days manually into the system.
1. A large number of purchases at service stations are made with payment

cards, such as MasterCard, American Express, fleet cards, debit cards and
others. Payment card transaction information is uploaded from the service
stations to the oil company, processed, settled and transmitted to the different
clearing houses. If an error occurred during upload, this transaction data
is also stored in the SAP system but flagged with an error. The relevant
transactions need to be corrected to include them in the normal payment card
transaction process (SSP invoicing and CH settlement). The POS system
at your business location has failed, so the service station partner has sent
you the paper receipts of the relevant purchases.
You create new credit card transactions in the ERP System.
Use the Payment card transaction - create function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Date of sale: Previous day (should be the same date used in exercise 1.1.1
Meter Reading Management)
Time of sale: Any time

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 517



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

PC type: Leave blank
PC Number: 34000111222
Choose Enter.
The PC type is determined automatically from the card number (American
Express cards start with ì34î).
Choose Create PC transaction.
Receipt number: 1
Terminal ID: (Your group number)
Choose the Item tab.
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SSR
Quantity: 100
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Cross price: 202
Choose Insert line. and enter another line item.
Enter:
Material: DIESEL-SSR
Quantity: 50
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Gross price: 171
Choose the Status information tab.
Choose Validation.
The validation status changes from Initial validation status to Transaction
is valid.
Choose the Payment Card tab.
Enter:
Expiry date: Current month/next year
The entered payment card number, the determined card category and the
check amounts are displayed as additional information.

Continued on next page

518 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Save your entries. For the following questions you should check Customizing
for payment card handling:
How does the system determine the card type from the number that you
enter in the PC number entry field?
_____________________________
_____________________________

2. You create new fleet card transactions in the ERP System.
Use the Payment card transaction ñ create function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Date of sale: Previous day (should be the same date used in the first exercise
in unit ìMeter Reading Managementî)
Time of sale: Any time
PC type: Leave blank
PC Number: 704300
Choose Enter.
The PC type is determined automatically from the card number (DKV fleet
cards start with ì7043î).
Choose Create PC transaction.
Receipt number: 2
Terminal ID: (Your group number)
Enter:
Choose the Item tab.
Enter:
Material: SHOPPRODUCT
Quantity: 1
Sales unit: ST
Gross price: 50
Choose Insert line and enter another line item.
Enter:
Material: DIESEL-SSR
Quantity: 50

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 519



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Gross price: 171
Choose the Status information tab.
Choose Validation (F7).
The validation status changes from ìInitial validation statusî to ìMaterial
restriction errorî.
You get this validation status because you can define restrictions on the
materials that can be purchased with specific payment cards. In your case
there is a restriction for the fleet card DKV. SHOPPRODUCT cannot be to
bought with this card type.
You have to delete the line item that includes SHOPPRODUCT.
Choose Validation again
The validation status changes now from ìMaterial restriction errorî to
ìTransaction is validî.
Where in Customizing is the material restriction set?
Note the Customizing path:
___________________________________
___________________________________
Choose the Payment Card tab.
Enter:
Expiry date: Current month/next year
The entered payment card number, the determined card category and the
check amounts are displayed as additional information.
Save your entries.

Task 2:
To get an overview of the payment card business at a particular service station
or a set of service stations within a certain time period, you use the statistical
payment card report.
1. You want to examine the uploaded and manually created payment card

transactions.
Use the List Payment card transaction function.
Enter:

Continued on next page

520 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Business location ID LOCAT-##
Date of sale: Previous date
Leave all other entries unchanged.
Choose Execute.
You get an overview of all uploaded payment card transactions that fit your
selection criteria.
You can navigate to the item view within a certain payment card transaction
by clicking the check box with a plus sign.

2. Let the system now display the transactions paid for with AMEX.
What is the AMEX participation fee for item 10?
________________________________________
Choose the Settlement Information tab.
Have any documents been created?
________________________________________
Go back.

Task 3:
You are now the person responsible for Customizing for payment cards. You want
to check the Customizing settings for payment cards within your ERP System.
1. Explain the three level concept for payment cards. Which data is held at

company code level?
________________________________________
________________________________________
________________________________________

2. Where can you find the central address master of the clearing house?
________________________________________
________________________________________

3. How is the clearing house determined?
________________________________________
________________________________________

4. Which split criteria are defined for split result EC1 and EC2?
________________________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 521



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

________________________________________

Task 4:
You wish to run partner invoicing for a particular location and sales date.
Invoicing will be carried out for the partner at this service station. You will
display the invoicing document (cash and credit card document) created and
examine it. In addition, you will view the payment card header of the cash and
credit card document.
1.
First, check if there is data in the meter reading history table and in the payment

card transaction record for the same date (previous two days).
Use the List meter reading history function for the meter readings.
Use the List payment card transaction function for the payment card
transactions.

2. Create a service station partner invoice from the source data provided.
Use the Location partner claim ñ create invoices function.
Enter:
Locations: LOCAT-##
Transaction dates: 1st day of the current month to todayís date
Set all other dates to: (Two days before)
Select the flags to skip the schedule check, skip the status check, and skip
execution check.
Select the flag Display document numbers?
Choose Execute. Note the number of the created invoices.
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
Why are two invoicing documents created?
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
Double-click on the invoice to display the invoicing document.

3. Examine the service station partner invoice for cash and credit card sales.

Continued on next page

522 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

You can analyze a service station partner invoice by choosing the List
location partner invoices function. This calls the Daily claim report.
With the Daily claim report you can select any location or set of locations for
any period you like. Choose List location partner invoices.
Enter:
Location numbers: LOCAT-##
Month from: Current month
Year from: Current year
Month to: Current month
Year to: Current year
Choose Execute.
The Service station invoicing report appears.
On the left side of the screen you can scroll down to different levels.
Which levels are shown?
_______________________________
_______________________________
_______________________________
Double-click on the cash and credit card invoice document that you created
in exercise 3.1.
Examine the first item on the invoice. What commission does the service
station partner get?
a) What is the rate?
_______________________________
b) What is the amount?
_______________________________
How is the commission determined? Choose Analysis.
_______________________________
Examine the invoice header.
What is the amount of the:
a) Participation fee for AMEX? ________________________
b) Clearing house payment fee for AMEX? __________________
What are the two amounts used for?

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 523



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

_______________________________
_______________________________
What is the total amount for sales with credit cards?
_______________________________

4. Examine the service station partner invoice for fleet card sales.
What is the total net value of the invoice?
__________________________________
__________________________________
Why is the amount negative?
__________________________________
__________________________________
Check the accounting document.
Choose Back.
Navigate to the payment card transactions and check the Settlement
Information tab.
Which documents are shown?
__________________________________
Go back.

524 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Solution 15: Payment Cards and Service
Station Partner Invoicing
Task 1:
You are responsible for checking the uploaded payment card transaction data from
your business locations. Unfortunately the POS system of your service station has
broken down and it will take a few days to repair it. You must enter the payment
card transactions for these days manually into the system.
1. A large number of purchases at service stations are made with payment

cards, such as MasterCard, American Express, fleet cards, debit cards and
others. Payment card transaction information is uploaded from the service
stations to the oil company, processed, settled and transmitted to the different
clearing houses. If an error occurred during upload, this transaction data
is also stored in the SAP system but flagged with an error. The relevant
transactions need to be corrected to include them in the normal payment card
transaction process (SSP invoicing and CH settlement). The POS system
at your business location has failed, so the service station partner has sent
you the paper receipts of the relevant purchases.
You create new credit card transactions in the ERP System.
Use the Payment card transaction - create function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Date of sale: Previous day (should be the same date used in exercise 1.1.1
Meter Reading Management)
Time of sale: Any time
PC type: Leave blank
PC Number: 34000111222
Choose Enter.
The PC type is determined automatically from the card number (American
Express cards start with ì34î).
Choose Create PC transaction.
Receipt number: 1
Terminal ID: (Your group number)
Choose the Item tab.
Enter:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 525



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Material: REGULAR-SSR
Quantity: 100
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Cross price: 202
Choose Insert line. and enter another line item.
Enter:
Material: DIESEL-SSR
Quantity: 50
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Gross price: 171
Choose the Status information tab.
Choose Validation.
The validation status changes from Initial validation status to Transaction
is valid.
Choose the Payment Card tab.
Enter:
Expiry date: Current month/next year
The entered payment card number, the determined card category and the
check amounts are displayed as additional information.
Save your entries. For the following questions you should check Customizing
for payment card handling:
How does the system determine the card type from the number that you
enter in the PC number entry field?
_____________________________
_____________________________
a) To create new credit card transactions in the ERP System, choose:

Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Payment Cards→ Payment card transaction record→ Create
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location ID: LOCAT-##

Continued on next page

526 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Date of sale: (Previous day)
Time of sale: Any time
PC type: Leave blank
PC Number: 34000111222
Choose Enter.
Choose Create PC transaction (F8).
The DTF Payment card transaction: Create screen appears.
Enter:
Receipt number: 1
Terminal ID: (Your group number)
Choose the Item tab.
Enter:
Material: REGULAR-SSR
Quantity: 100
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Gross price: 202
Choose Insert line. and enter another line item.
Enter:
Material: DIESEL-SSR
Quantity: 50
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Gross price: 171
Choose the Status information tab.
Choose Validation (F7).
The validation status changes from Initial validation status to
Transaction is valid and the message Validation executed successfully
appears at the bottom of the screen.
Choose the Payment Card tab.
Enter:

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 527



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Expiry date: Current month/next year
Choose Save
To check how the system determines the card type from the number
that you enter in the PC number entry field, open a new R/3 session
and choose:
IMG→ Industry Solution Oil&Gas (Downstream)→ SSR→ Payment
Card Handling→ General Settings→ Assign number ranges for
payment card numbers to payment card types
To check clearing house determination, choose:
IMG→ Industry Solution Oil&Gas(Downstream)→ SSR→ Payment
Card Handling→ Clearing House→ Clearing House Object→
Clearing House Determination→ Assign clearing house
Select table 002 (Company/Card type).
For application VD (payment cards), condition type A001 (CH object
determination), company code 1100 and payment card type AMEX the
clearing house AMEX_1 will be determined.

2. You create new fleet card transactions in the ERP System.
Use the Payment card transaction ñ create function.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Date of sale: Previous day (should be the same date used in the first exercise
in unit ìMeter Reading Managementî)
Time of sale: Any time
PC type: Leave blank
PC Number: 704300
Choose Enter.
The PC type is determined automatically from the card number (DKV fleet
cards start with ì7043î).
Choose Create PC transaction.
Receipt number: 2
Terminal ID: (Your group number)
Enter:
Choose the Item tab.
Enter:

Continued on next page

528 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Material: SHOPPRODUCT
Quantity: 1
Sales unit: ST
Gross price: 50
Choose Insert line and enter another line item.
Enter:
Material: DIESEL-SSR
Quantity: 50
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Gross price: 171
Choose the Status information tab.
Choose Validation (F7).
The validation status changes from ìInitial validation statusî to ìMaterial
restriction errorî.
You get this validation status because you can define restrictions on the
materials that can be purchased with specific payment cards. In your case
there is a restriction for the fleet card DKV. SHOPPRODUCT cannot be to
bought with this card type.
You have to delete the line item that includes SHOPPRODUCT.
Choose Validation again
The validation status changes now from ìMaterial restriction errorî to
ìTransaction is validî.
Where in Customizing is the material restriction set?
Note the Customizing path:
___________________________________
___________________________________
Choose the Payment Card tab.
Enter:
Expiry date: Current month/next year
The entered payment card number, the determined card category and the
check amounts are displayed as additional information.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 529



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Save your entries.
a) To create new credit card transactions in the ERP System, choose:

Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Payment Cards→ Payment card transaction record→ Create
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
Date of sale: (Previous day)
Time of sale: Any time
PC type: Leave blank
PC Number: 704300
Choose Enter.
Choose Create PC transaction (F8).
The DTF Payment card transaction: Create screen appears.
Enter:
Receipt number: 2
Terminal ID: (Your group number)
Choose the Item tab.
Enter:
Material: SHOPPRODUCT
Quantity: 1
Sales unit: ST
Gross price: 50
Choose Insert line. and enter another line item.
Enter:
Material: DIESEL-SSR
Quantity: 50
Sales unit: L
Service type: SELF
Gross price: 171
Choose the Status information tab.
Choose Validation (F7).

Continued on next page

530 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

The validation status changes from ìInitial validation statusî to
ìMaterial restriction errorî and the message ìValidation was executed,
but an error occurredî appears at the bottom of the screen.
In your case there is a restriction for the fleet card DKV.
SHOPPRODUCT may not be bought with this card type.
To delete the line item that includes SHOPPRODUCT, choose the
Item tab.
Select the item that includes SHOPPRODUCT and choose Delete line.
Choose Validation (F7) again.
To check where in Customizing the material restriction is set, open
a new R/3 session and choose:
IMG→ Industry Solution Oil&Gas(Downstream)→ SSR→ Payment
Card Handling→ Payment Card Upload→ Maintain material
restriction on material number
Go back to the R/3 application session.
Choose the Payment Card tab.
Enter:
Expiry date: Current month/next year
Choose Save.

Task 2:
To get an overview of the payment card business at a particular service station
or a set of service stations within a certain time period, you use the statistical
payment card report.
1. You want to examine the uploaded and manually created payment card

transactions.
Use the List Payment card transaction function.
Enter:
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Date of sale: Previous date
Leave all other entries unchanged.
Choose Execute.
You get an overview of all uploaded payment card transactions that fit your
selection criteria.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 531



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

You can navigate to the item view within a certain payment card transaction
by clicking the check box with a plus sign.
a) To investigate the uploaded and manually created payment card

transactions, choose: Logistics→ > Sales and Distribution→ Service
Station Retailing→ Payment Cards→ Payment card transaction
record→ List payment card transactions
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Date of sale: Previous date
Leave all other entries unchanged.
Choose Execute.
The List payment card transactions screen appears.
You get an overview of all uploaded payment card transactions that
fit your selection criteria.
You can navigate to the item view within a certain payment card
transaction by opening the node.

2. Let the system now display the transactions paid for with AMEX.
What is the AMEX participation fee for item 10?
________________________________________
Choose the Settlement Information tab.
Have any documents been created?
________________________________________

Continued on next page

532 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Go back.
a) To display the detailed payment card transactions for a payment

with AMEX double click on the line with the AMEX payment card
transaction.
You check the participation fee for item 10 by selecting the line item 10
and choosing Partner fee.
The net value of the participation fee is displayed at the top of the
screen and within the pricing procedure.
Go back, and choose the Settlement Information tab.
On this tab the documents that were related to the payment card
transaction are displayed. This may be the invoice and FI document for
the dealer and/or the invoice and FI document for the clearing house.
In our exercise no documents have yet been created.

Task 3:
You are now the person responsible for Customizing for payment cards. You want
to check the Customizing settings for payment cards within your ERP System.
1. Explain the three level concept for payment cards. Which data is held at

company code level?
________________________________________
________________________________________

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 533



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

________________________________________
a) Three level concept for payment cards:

At the R/3 client level, you define the payment card type description
and parameters. The payment card type identifies the link to the
payment card category.
At the company code level, you define the payment card type as well
as the:
ï Black list and clearing house check amounts
ï Splitting indicator
ï Material restriction indicator
ï Settlement type
ï Posting type (CARD or CASH)
ï Document pricing procedures for clearing house payment card

fees and dealer participation
At the business location level, you define the accepted payment card
types for each location.

2. Where can you find the central address master of the clearing house?
________________________________________
________________________________________
a) The central address master record for the clearing house is assigned to

the clearing house object. You choose the Address pushbutton in the
toolbar of the clearing house object maintenance screen to display
or maintain the address.

3. How is the clearing house determined?
________________________________________

Continued on next page

534 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

________________________________________
a) Clearing house determination: IMG→ Industry Solution Oil&Gas

(Downstream)→ SSR→ Payment Card Handling→ Clearing House
→ Clearing House Object→ Clearing House Determination→ Assign
Clearing House
Choose table 001 or 002.
The clearing house is determined by:
ï Application (VD)
ï Condition type (A001)
ï Company Code (1100)
ï Payment card type(AMEX; EC, Ö.)
ï and split result (for table 001) (EC1 or EC2)

4. Which split criteria are defined for split result EC1 and EC2?
________________________________________
________________________________________
a) For split result EC1 the split criteria ìBank no. +++5++++î (4th digit

of the bank no is a ì5î) is defined and for split result EC2 the split
criteria ìBank no. ++++++++î is defined.

Task 4:
You wish to run partner invoicing for a particular location and sales date.
Invoicing will be carried out for the partner at this service station. You will
display the invoicing document (cash and credit card document) created and
examine it. In addition, you will view the payment card header of the cash and
credit card document.
1.
First, check if there is data in the meter reading history table and in the payment

card transaction record for the same date (previous two days).
Use the List meter reading history function for the meter readings.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 535



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Use the List payment card transaction function for the payment card
transactions.
a) To search for existing data within the meter reading history table,

choose: Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station
Retailing→ Bulk material handling→ Information system→ List
meter reading history
The Fuels meter reading: List meter reading history screen appears.
Enter:
Location ID: LOCAT-##
In section Data Selection, enter:
From: 1st day of current month
To: Todayís date
List variant: 01
Choose Enter
There should be meter readings for previous two days.
To search for existing data within the payment card transaction record,
choose:
Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→
Payment cards→ Payment card transaction record→ List payment
card transactions
Enter the following data on the initial screen:
Business location ID LOCAT-##
Date of sale: 1st day of current month to today's date
Leave all other entries unchanged.
Choose Execute.
The List payment card transactions screen appears.
You get an overview of all uploaded payment card transactions that
fit your selection criteria.
There should be payment card transactions for the previous two days.

2. Create a service station partner invoice from the source data provided.
Use the Location partner claim ñ create invoices function.
Enter:
Locations: LOCAT-##

Continued on next page

536 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Transaction dates: 1st day of the current month to todayís date
Set all other dates to: (Two days before)
Select the flags to skip the schedule check, skip the status check, and skip
execution check.
Select the flag Display document numbers?
Choose Execute. Note the number of the created invoices.
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
Why are two invoicing documents created?
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
Double-click on the invoice to display the invoicing document.
a) To create a service station partner invoice from the source data

provided, choose: Logistics→ Sales and Distribution→ Service
Station Retailing→ Periodic claim processing→ Location partner
claim→ Create invoices
Enter:
Locations: LOCAT-##
Transaction dates: 1st day of current month to todayís date
Set all other dates to: (Two dayís before)
Select the flags for skip schedule check, skip status check, skip
execution check.
Select Display document numbers? Choose Execute.
The SSR Service station partner invoicing screen appears with the
message 1 location(s) processed successfully and the summary of
successful documents.
Note the numbers of the invoices.
Two invoices are created because in this scenario the oil company
defines a difference between credit cards and fleet cards. Credit card
handling is a service provided by the oil company to the partner. The
oil company receives the credit card transactions through the POS
system and will deal with the credit card clearing house on the partnerís

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 537



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

behalf. The oil company reduces the partner invoice by the value of the
credit card sales and will receive reimbursement for this amount from
the clearing house using the clearing house settlement process.
In this scenario fleet card companies (fleet card clearing houses)
are treated by the oil company as customers. Oil company owned
products purchased at the service station by fleet card are bought from
the service station partner by the oil company and then sold to the
fleet card company. The partner is not charged for the oil company
owned products purchased on fleet cards and the fleet card company is
invoiced as part of the fleet card settlement process.
The difference in handling between credit cards and fleet cards requires
at least two separate billing documents for the service station partner.
The first document contains the cash and credit card sales (called the
cash and credit card document) at the service station and the second
document contains the fleet card sales (called the fleet card document).
The cash and credit card document behaves as a ìtrue invoiceî, as its
purpose is to bill the partner for the sale of oil company owned products.
The fleet card document behaves as a ìcredit noteî, as its purpose is to
credit the partner for the sale of dealer owned products.

3. Examine the service station partner invoice for cash and credit card sales.
You can analyze a service station partner invoice by choosing the List
location partner invoices function. This calls the Daily claim report.
With the Daily claim report you can select any location or set of locations for
any period you like. Choose List location partner invoices.
Enter:
Location numbers: LOCAT-##
Month from: Current month
Year from: Current year
Month to: Current month
Year to: Current year
Choose Execute.
The Service station invoicing report appears.
On the left side of the screen you can scroll down to different levels.
Which levels are shown?
_______________________________
_______________________________

Continued on next page

538 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

_______________________________
Double-click on the cash and credit card invoice document that you created
in exercise 3.1.
Examine the first item on the invoice. What commission does the service
station partner get?
a) What is the rate?
_______________________________
b) What is the amount?
_______________________________
How is the commission determined? Choose Analysis.
_______________________________
Examine the invoice header.
What is the amount of the:
a) Participation fee for AMEX? ________________________
b) Clearing house payment fee for AMEX? __________________
What are the two amounts used for?
_______________________________
_______________________________
What is the total amount for sales with credit cards?
_______________________________
a) You examine the service station partner invoice by choosing: Logistics

→ Sales and Distribution→ Service Station Retailing→ Periodic
claim processing→ Information system→ List location partner
invoices
Enter:
Location numbers: LOCAT-##
Month from: Current month
Year from: Current year
Month to: Current month
Year to: Current year
Choose Execute.
The Service station invoicing report screen appears.

Continued on next page

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 539



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

The following levels are shown: Location level, period (monthly) level,
daily level, and the active documents.
Double-click on the first invoice document to display the Display:
Overview of billing items screen.
To examine the first item on the invoice, select the first line and choose
Display item details.
The Display: Item data screen appears.
The commission condition is displayed within the pricing procedure.
Choose the Conditions tab.
The commission rate is 3- EUR per 100L.
The commission amount depends on the fuel quantity.
To investigate how the commission is determined, choose Analysis.
The Commission determination analysis screen appears
Expand the condition QCM1 (Commission) and position the cursor
on the access details 10(K030).
On the right side of the screen the Access details 10 (QCM1) appear.
Here you can find the access sequence: Sales organization, distribution
channel, material price group.
Choose Back twice.
To examine the invoice header, choose Display document header
details or Goto→ Header→ Header details.
The AMEX participation fee and clearing house payment fees are
displayed in the pricing procedure.
Choose the Conditions tab.
The oil company can charge the partner a fee for handling payment
cards at the station on his/her behalf. This ìparticipation feeî is
incorporated in both partner documents as a standard discount/surcharge
pricing condition (value is positive). The value of this condition will
increase the debit posting to the partnerís sub-ledger account. In this
scenario, the participation fee is charged for both credit cards and fleet
cards. To display the total amount for payment card choose Goto→
Header→ Payment cards.

4. Examine the service station partner invoice for fleet card sales.
What is the total net value of the invoice?
__________________________________
__________________________________

Continued on next page

540 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Payment Cards and Service Station Partner Invoicing

Why is the amount negative?
__________________________________
__________________________________
Check the accounting document.
Choose Back.
Navigate to the payment card transactions and check the Settlement
Information tab.
Which documents are shown?
__________________________________
Go back.
a) Examine the service station partner invoice for fleet card sales.

You display the total net value of the invoice by choosing Display
document header details or Goto→ Header→ Header details.
The total net value displayed on the Conditions tab.
The amount is negative because the fleet card document behaves as
a credit note, as its purpose is to credit the partner for the sale of
dealer owned products. For technical reasons the fleet card document
is an invoice billing document (billing document type F2) but has a
negative total.
To check the accounting document, choose Accounting overview and
click the accounting document.
Choose Back.
To navigate to the payment card transactions choose Environment→
Display payment card transactions
Choose the Settlement Information tab.
Now the number of the dealer invoice and FI document are shown
on the tab strip.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 541



Unit 8: Service Station Retailing IOG100

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Execute and control the payment card process including complaint processing
ï Explain the master data ñ three level concept
ï Describe the transaction upload process
ï Explain the splitting concept
ï Display, change, and create payment card transactions
ï Describe clearing house and fleet card company settlement
ï Create the service station partner invoice
ï Reverse the service station partner invoice
ï Analyze the service station partner invoice.

542 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Unit Summary

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Explain what is Service Station and Convenience Retailing (SSCR) solution
ï Which parties are involved in the Service Station and Convenience Retailing

(SSCR) business?
ï Which data is transmitted from and to the parties involved?
ï Explain the master data concept
ï Create a business location
ï Create master data at the general level
ï Assign a material handling group and a processing profile to a location
ï Create master data at the business type level
ï Explain the flexibility of pricing within SSR
ï Maintain relevant pricing master data
ï Maintain prices based on the competitor prices
ï Describe network and group pricing
ï Explain the reports on fuels pricing.
ï Describe the meter reading process
ï Maintain meter reading master data
ï Describe the performed checks during the upload process
ï Explain the meter reading error maintenance
ï Perform meter reading maintenance
ï Describe the dip reading process
ï Maintain storage object master data
ï Describe the checks during upload process
ï Explain the dip reading error maintenance
ï Post stock corrections
ï Execute and control the payment card process including complaint processing
ï Explain the master data ñ three level concept
ï Describe the transaction upload process
ï Explain the splitting concept
ï Display, change, and create payment card transactions
ï Describe clearing house and fleet card company settlement
ï Create the service station partner invoice
ï Reverse the service station partner invoice
ï Analyze the service station partner invoice.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 543



Unit Summary IOG100

544 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Unit 9
Analytics with SAP Business

Intelligence

Unit Overview
This unit gives an overview the concepts and the architecture of the SAP Business
Intelligence solution component.

Unit Objectives
After completing this unit, you will be able to:

ï Describe the architecture and major components of the SAP BI architecture
ï Describe the reporting features available to support end users
ï Describe oil and gas business scenarios available out of the box for SAP

Business Intelligence

Unit Contents
Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .546

Exercise 16: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .571

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 545



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics
Lesson Overview
This lesson will explain the fundamental basics of a business warehouse solution
and how SAP Business Intelligence supports a user to perform analytical and
reporting tasks. It will outline the architecture of the SAP Business Intelligence
solution and briefly discuss the functionality available to present reporting and
analytical results to an end user.

Lesson Objectives
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
ï Describe the architecture and major components of the SAP BI architecture
ï Describe the reporting features available to support end users
ï Describe oil and gas business scenarios available out of the box for SAP

Business Intelligence

Business Example
Your company has identified a need for users to access and receive reports from
one integrated Business source. In addition to the reports which are already
available for past and present data, you are also looking for other analytical
possibilities to enhance the future of your business.

546 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

Data Warehouse System

Figure 216: Data Warehouse System

A data warehouse system serves primarily to stage information of important
business processes and areas extracted from various data sources.
Data from mostly heterogeneous systems and with different degrees of detail are
brought together in order to provide this data in a scalable form to the whole
organization.
By using personalized and predefined reports or freely definable queries this data
can be analyzed for deviations and significant facts.
Areas of concern:
ï Comparison between forecasted and actual demand of products in a region
ï Tank usage in different plants
ï Performance of transportation systems
ï Comparison of planned vs. real budget
In brief, a data warehouse can
ï pool data from different, mostly heterogeneous sources,
ï overcome this heterogeneity on different levels (system, schema, and data),
ï stage data in the form required by the user.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 547



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Decision-makers urgently need reliable information from Production, Purchasing,
Sales and Distribution, Finance, and Human Resources departments. They require
an up-to-date and comprehensive picture of each individual business area and of
the business as a whole. This places considerable demands on data staging from
the underlying data sources.

Figure 217: What we expect from BI

The information must be stored in a homogeneous and consistent form at a central
location where it can be called up. Therefore, modern data warehouses require a
separate database that an independent application environment can use to provide
the required services objectively.
Efficient analysis techniques with powerful multi-dimensional visualization are
indispensable on the presentation side of the data warehouse. The system must be
able to cope with the information needs of the various user groups.
The demands made on the source systems are not so high. What is needed here
is an economic and comprehensive preparation of the data that is required by
the data warehouse.

548 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

The following demands are made on a data warehouse:
ï standardized structuring and presentation of all company information,
ï an easy-to-use, single-point of access to all company information,
ï sophisticated business reporting methods for self-service analysis at all

levels,
ï fast and cost-effective installation,
ï a high performance environment,
ï data staging from heterogeneous environment,
ï release of source systems and IT organization,
ï data access independent of the source system, and
ï analysis of data over a specific period of time, and the storage of historical

information (time-dependent master data).

Figure 218: SAP Business Intelligence

SAP BI allows you to analyze data from operational SAP applications or any other
business application. You can also extract and analyze data from external sources
such as databases, online services, and the Internet.
The system (data storage, loading and reporting), which is pre-configured for
core areas and processes, allows you to examine the relationships in every area
of your company.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 549



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

The realization of SAP BI is aimed for the following:
ï data warehousing system with optimized data structures for reporting and

analysis,
ï separate system,
ï OLAP engine and tools
ï comprehensive data-warehousing architectural base,
ï automated data warehouse management, and
ï pre-configuration using SAP global business know-how.
With these goals in mind, SAP has opted for a separate data-warehousing solution
that handles reporting activities as an autonomous business component, even
providing a separate server with its own database and SAP system: SAP Business
Intelligence.
All of the requirements and objectives mentioned so far have been met in the
conception and architecture of SAP BI.
Having implemented SAP BI and its metadata repository (description of data), the
customer has the clear advantage of being able to use the entire SAP know-how
built up over the many years of experience in developing business software
solutions. All SAP systems can be configured as source systems, and provide data
for all preconfigured core-areas and processes.

Terminology and Objects in SAP BI
To get an overview of important terminology used within SAP BI important terms
will be introduced on the following pages.

550 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

Figure 219: Terminology (I)

InfoObject
Business analysis-objects (customers, sales volumes, and so on) are called
InfoObjects in SAP BI. These InfoObjects can be divided into characteristics and
key figures. Characteristics can be further divided into units, time characteristics,
and technical characteristics (for example, request ID). Key figures are all data
fields that are used to store values or quantities (sales volumes, net sales, costs,
and so on). Characteristics describe the affiliation of key figures.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 551



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Figure 220: Terminology (II)

InfoCube.
The central data containers that form the basis for reports and analyses in SAP BI
are called InfoCubes. They contain key figures (sales volumes, incoming orders,
actual costs, and so on) and a link to the characteristics (master data of the SAP
BI system such as cost centers, customers, materials, and so on). Key figures
and characteristics are InfoObjects. Each individual InfoCube should contain a
self-contained dataset, since queries refer primarily to one InfoCube.
Master data in the BI system consists of attributes of a characteristic (for example,
the person responsible for a cost center), as well as hierarchies and texts of a
characteristic.
An InfoCube consists of several database tables that are linked according to the star
schema. They include a fact table that contains the InfoCube key figures, as well
as several surrounding dimension tables that store the links to the characteristics.
ï Each InfoCube has one fact table and a maximum of 16 dimension tables.
ï Each fact table can contain a maximum of 233 key figures.
ï A dimension can contain up to 248 freely available characteristics.
InfoCubes are stored in structures in the SAP BI system. If you want to store an
InfoCube, you create a new folder or use an existing one. This is similar to the
method used when storing data on your PC: These folders are called InfoAreas in
SAP BI.

552 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

Figure 221: Terminology (III)

InfoProvider
InfoProvider is the super-ordinate term for an object that you can use to create
reports in Business Explorer (BEx). InfoProviders are objects or views that are
relevant to reporting.
InfoProviders include various database meta-objects that deliver data for query
definitions. The type of data procurement differs depending on the InfoProvider
used. However, the type of data procurement has no influence on reporting.
InfoProviders deliver data that can be analyzed using a query.
There are two types of data stores. Physical stores include:
ï BasicCubes,
ï Data Store Objects, and
ï InfoObjects.
Logical views of physical data stores include:
ï InfoSets,
ï RemoteCubes,
ï VirtualInfoCubes, and
ï MultiProviders.
The previous figure gives an overview of SAP BI reportable objects, divided into
data targets that contain physical data, and InfoProviders that only contain logical
views. From the BEx view, only InfoProviders are accessed. The way in which
the data is modeled is inconsequential to the BEx toolset.
DataStore Object

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 553



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

A DataStore Object stores data at the basic level (document level). It is normally
used to resolve and consolidate datasets. These datasets are often from various
data sources and/or source systems
Data Warehousing Workbench
The Data Warehousing Workbench is a workplace for SAP BI administrators.
Data Warehousing Workbench functions are used to configure, control, and
administrate SAP BI.
SAP BI enables the analysis of data from operative SAP applications as well as all
other business applications and external data sources such as databases, online
services, and the Internet.

Figure 222: SAP Business Intelligence Architecture

As shown above, the SAP BI architecture provides for the acquisition,
transformation, storage, analysis, access and distribution of data from both SAP
and non-SAP sources.
Data Warehouse Layer
The Data Warehouse Layer is responsible for the cleansing, loading, storage, and
the management of the data needed for the enterprise.
Through different interfaces it is possible to extract data from operative SAP
applications as well as all other business applications and external data sources
such as databases, online services, and the Internet.
BI Platform Layer

554 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

The BI platform layer contains BI services to support complex analysis tasks and
functions. It contains the Analytic Engine, which processes the data requested
through BEx analysis navigations and supports the interface that allows for the
entry and manipulation of data as part of BI Integrated Planning. Finally, special
analysis tools such as the Analysis Process Designer (APDE) and the Data Mining
provide the analysts at your company with the tools to merge, mine, preprocess,
store, and analyze data without support from your technical team.
Business Explorer Suite
The Business Explorer Suite provides flexible reporting and analysis tools targeted
at both power users and end users. You can use these tools for strategic analysis
and to support the decision-making process in your organization. These tools
include query, reporting, and analysis functions. BEx enables a broad range of
users to access BI information using the SAP NetWeaver Portal, intranet/Internet
(Web Application Design), or mobile devices (WAP or i-mode-enabled mobile
telephones and personal digital assistants). Many analysis features are available;
slice and dice (pivot like functions is only the beginning. In addition, many
outputs options are supported, including formatted Microsoft Excel, Web cockpits,
formatted Web output (BEx Reports) and Adobe PDF documents.

Figure 223: Different User Types in SAP BI

New studies have shown that up to 70 percent of all OLAP system users are basic
users. Compared to the advanced users and query developers, basic users only use
the analytical functions of the system on a very small scale. This is because the
basic users usually carry out predefined queries with fixed datasets. Therefore,
most of SAP users need a simple user interface.
However, the experienced users and query developers who design and carry out
information analyses on several levels must be able to use a comprehensive and
effective range of tools for their analyzing options.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 555



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

SAP catered to these various user needs when developing the Business Intelligence.

Figure 224: BI Business Explorer Suite

The Business Explorer Suite provides flexible reporting and analysis tools targeted
at both power users and end users. To analysis, access and distribute the data
following tools are available:
The BEx Query Designer is the tool for creating query definitions. These query
definitions structure how data from a variety of sources will be structured for
presentation to the user. Power users can use the BEx Query Designer to create
queries based on data stored in BI data providers in an easy and intuitive manner
using Drag and Drop. Analyses and reports can draw on components that need to
be created only once but can be reused in many queries. BEx queries and query
views are the basis for analyses, reports, and planning scenarios in the BEx Web
Application Designer, BEx Report Designer, and BEx Analyzer (Excel Add-in).
Within the BEx Web area, the Web Analyzer provides for web-based execution
of queries as well as ad hoc analysis of data from a wide array of sources.
The BEx Web Application Designer is a complete toolset for designing and
deploying custom web applications within the organization. These applications
often contain data from queries, but could also provide access to other structured
and unstructured data. The BEx Report Designer allows for a high degree of
control over the formatting of query output. They can change the layout of reports
individually, add headers and footers to reports and pages, integrate texts, pictures,
and charts, enter page breaks, etc. The Web Item Report enables power users to
include formatted reports in BEx Web applications.
Queries can be executed within several different user interfaces. The BEx
Analyzer makes use of Microsoft Excel to provide a well-understood interface
for viewing and analyzing data. Information Broadcasting is accomplished by the
BEx Broadcaster that provides all the functions necessary to distribute queries,

556 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

reports and analyses to end users and to the Enterprise Portal. In addition, the
BEx Broadcaster provides a wide range of functions such as alerting and the pre
calculation of results.
The SAP NetWeaver Portal serves as the main interface for users wanting to
access business information. With powerful Knowledge Management features
for a wide range of collaboration and feedback activities, the SAP NetWeaver
Portal integrates the reporting and analysis tasks of users of all types. BEx Web
Applications and BEx reports are deployed in SAP NetWeaver Portal. They easily
converted into PDF format and printout.
ï Empower business users
ï Design queries in an easy and intuitive way and use as the basis for a

user-oriented presentation of information and effective analysis
ï Design presentation-quality, print-optimized formatted reports
ï Wizard-based creation of Web applications for all user types - no coding

necessary
ï Provides BI data in an user-oriented and flexible way
ï Information is provided for all types of BI users
ï Personalized access to BI information in SAP NetWeaver Portal supports

quick and efficient decision making
ï Simple conversion of reports and Web applications to PDF files allowing BI

information to be printed as required.

Figure 225: Query Designer I

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 557



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Using the SAP BI reporting functions, you can evaluate a dataset from an
InfoProvider according to various characteristics and key figures. To do this, you
define a query for your chosen InfoProvider in the BEx Query Designer.
To support you in your query definition the BEx Query Designer contains the
following main functions:
ï Definition of queries in the BEx Query Designer for OLAP reporting and

also for tabular reporting.
ï Definition of reusable restricted key figures
ï Definition of reusable calculated key figures
ï Definition of conditions
ï Definition of exceptions
ï Definition of variables

558 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

The query designer contains many different panes of which some are only
displayed when a function button is pressed. The following key panes are
available under ìRows/Columnsî.
1. Directory tree of selected InfoProvider

Once you selected the relevant InfoProvider for your query, all available
objects (dimensions, key figures, structures) display in the directory tree in
the left screen area of the Query Designer.

2. Free Characteristics:
You transfer those characteristics into the free characteristics area that do not
display in the initial view of the results when you execute the query in the
BEx Analyzer or on the Web. You can then integrate these characteristics
into the results through navigation steps. You can also use free characteristics
for selecting filter values in the report

3. Rows:
You define the rows of your report in this area via drag and drop

4. Columns:
You define the columns of your report in this area via drag and drop

5. Preview:
This area gives a preview of the initial query results area depending on the
arrangements set in pane for columns and rows.

6. Tasks:
A list of suitable tasks related to the highlighted query object are displayed
here. You can click on any of the tasks in the list to go directly to the settings.

7. Where-used:
This pane provides information relating to the use of the query object.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 559



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Figure 226: Query Designer II

Via ìFiltersî following panes are available in addition:
1. Characteristic Restriction

Here you define the characteristic filter values which apply to the entire
result set.

2. Default Values
In this pane you define the characteristic filter values which should be used
for the initial view of the result set. The user may choose to modify these
filters in the result.

3. Properties
Here is where the settings relevant to the currently highlighted query object
are displayed. You can also make changes to the setting here. Often there
will be multiple tabs used to organize the settings in this pane.

4. Messages
This pane is where informational or error messages are displayed

560 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

To create a query, you can expand or collapse the InfoProvider directories by
choosing the plus or minus symbol. By expanding the key figure node in the
InfoProvider tree, for example, you can display a list of all the key figures for
the InfoProvider.
ï Use Drag&Drop to transfer the characteristics, key figures, and structures

of the InfoProvider into the various panes within the Query Designer. You
can also include characteristic attributes and variables in the query definition
in this way

ï You can use the right mouse button to call all of the valid functions that
are in the current context menu. To do this, first select the required query
component, then, select a menu entry from the context menu.

ï By double-clicking on an element in the query designer, you call a dialog
box that offers the default function for that element. For example, if you
double-click on a characteristic, the dialog box for restricting characteristics
appears

ï If you click on an element you will notice that the suitable tasks are also
displayed in the Task Pane. Simply click on one of the tasks to open up
the dialog box to make the settings.

Figure 227: Restricted Key Figures

Defining Restricted Key Figures

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 561



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Restricted key figures are (basic) key figures of the InfoProvider that are restricted
(filtered) by one or more characteristic selections. The key figure that is restricted
by one or more characteristic selections can be a basic key figure, a calculated key
figure, or a key figure that is already restricted.
By using restricted key figures, you can focus the query result on certain values.
Unlike a filter, whose restrictions are valid for the entire query, for a restricted key
figure, only the key figure in question is restricted to its allocated charateristic
value or characteristic value interval. Scenarios such as comparing a particular
key figure for various time segments, or plan/actual comparison for a key figure
if the plan data is stored using a particular characteristic can be realized using
restricted key figures.
You can create restricted key figures at the InfoProvider level, or locally in the
query definition. Restricted key figures that are defined at the InfoProvider level
are available in every query definition of the InfoProvider in question.

Figure 228: Calculated Key Figures

In the Query Designer, you can use a formula to calculate key figures that are not
in the InfoProvider by using basic key figures, restricted key figures and existing
calculated key figures in the formula definition.
Defining Calculated Key Figures at the Query Level
You can use all basic key figures of the InfoProvider in question, as well as the
newly defined restricted and calculated key figures of the InfoProvider, to define
new calculated key figures. You can define calculated key figures at both the
query level and the InfoProvider level. At the query level, the calculated key

562 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

figure is valid only for the query in question. If you create a calculated kea figure
at the InfoProvider level, you can use it in all queries that are based on the same
InfoProvider.
Defining Calculated Key Figures at the InfoProvider Level
To define calculated key figures at the query level, you can include all types of
key figures which are defined at the InfoProvider level, these include basic key
figures, restricted key figures and, of course, calculated key figures. However you
must remember that you do not have access to all operators as some operators
only make sense at the query level. Dońt forget that once you have defined the
calculated key figure at the InfoProvider level it is not automatically included in
your query, you must drag and drop it to where it should be used.

Figure 229: Conditions

Conditions are used for a flexible restriction of a report so that only the most
important information is displayed. This enables a more efficient analysis of data
when large amounts of data are analyzed.
If a condition is applied to a query, no figures are changed. Instead, the numbers
not relevant for display are hidden.
Conditions have no effect on the values displayed in the results rows. The results
row of a query with an active condition is the same as the results row of a query
without this condition.
It is possible to define multiple conditions for a query. A characteristic value is
only displayed when it fulfills all (active) conditions of the query. The result set
is therefore independent of the evaluation sequence.
Examples for Conditions:

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 563



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Top N, Bottom N:
Customers: Top 3 with bottom 5 sales volumes
A list of the three customers with the strongest sales and the five customers
with the weakest sales is displayed, that is, the union of both condition rows
Top 3 Sales and Bottom 5 Sales.

Top Percent, Bottom Percent:
Material: Top 25% of sales revenue
You receive a list of the strongest materials ñ with respect to revenue ñ until
25% of the total revenue is attained.
Material: Bottom 25% of sales revenue
You receive a list of the weakest materials ñ with respect to revenue ñ until
25% of the total revenue is attained

Figure 230: Exceptions

The functions in exception reporting enable you to select and highlight unusual
deviations of key figure values in a query. You can see deviations from predefined
threshold values or intervals in the query result displayed in different colors if
the exception is active. Early spotting of these deviations provides the basis for
timely and effective reactions.

564 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

Exception reporting is made up of three functional areas:
ï Defining exceptions

ñ Determining threshold values or intervals that are given a priority
(bad, critical, good). The priority given to an exception corresponds
to pre-assigned colors that become more ëintenseí the greater the
deviation.

ñ Determining the characteristic/key figure combination(s) that the
exception is to affect.

ï Evaluating exceptions online
ñ The cell areas of the table of an executed query for which the defined

exceptions were exceeded or fallen short of are highlighted in color
according to the definition.

ñ Evaluating exceptions in the background
With the BEx Broadcaster, it is possible to check queries for exceptions
in the background. If a threshold value for an exception is exceeded or
not reached, a document is created immediately and distributed to a
predefined list of recipients by e-mail, to the portal, or as an alert.

Exceptions for a query defined in the Query Designer are globally valid for a
query in all workbooks and Web applications.

Figure 231: Variables

Variables are used to create flexible reports with free selection of characteristic
values. Variables serve as place holders within a query that are filled with values
when the query or a Web application containing the query is executed.
ï The variable type specifies where a variable can be used:

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 565



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

ñ Characteristic value variables
Characteristic value variables represent characteristic values and can be
used wherever characteristic values can be used.

ñ Hierarchy variables
Hierarchy variables represent hierarchies and can be used wherever
hierarchies can be selected.

ñ Hierarchy node variables
Hierarchy node variables represent a node in a hierarchy and can be
used wherever hierarchy nodes can be used.

ñ Text variables
Text variables represent a text and can be used in descriptions of
queries, calculated key figures, restricted key figures and formulas.

ñ Formula variables
Formula variables represent numerical values and can be used in
formulas and for selecting exceptions and conditions.

ï The processing type determines how a variable is filled with a value for the
runtime of the query or Web application:
ñ Manual Entry/Default Value

Values can be entered manually. It is also possible to select a default
value, which can be specified when defining a variable.

ñ Replacement Path
Characteristic value variables with the processing type Replacement
Path can be replaced with the results of another query.

ñ Customer Exit
A function module exit can be used to fill variables.

ñ SAP Exit
SAP delivers a number of variables. There are variables that are
processed via automatic replacement using a predefined replacement
path.

ñ Authorizations
The processing type Authorization enables variables to be filled with
values automatically from the authorization of a user.

ï Variables are not dependent on the InfoProvider, only on the InfoObject. A
variable that has been defined for an InfoObject is available in all queries
that use this InfoObject.

566 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

Figure 232: Exchange With

To analyze business key figures (for example, total quantity) within existing
BI reports, BEx (Web) Analyzer offers different navigation functions to create
various views of the query data. The initial data view after the query is executed
has been specified during the query definition.
Navigation options within a query are accessible through context menu
(right-click) or can be executed via drag and drop of query elements.
On the following pages some of the most common navigation techniques using
drag and drop functionality will be explored.
Any time you want to swap the location of one object in the analysis with another
object, you may simply drag one item on top of the other and the change will be
made automatically. Above, the user swaps Storage Location for Plant. The user
could have also brought up the context menu for either characteristics and selected
Exchange ... with ... to effect the swap.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 567



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Figure 233: Drill Down

One of the most common navigation functions is the Drill Down (or Drill Across).
In the graphic above, the user drags Storage Location from the navigation area
and drops it on top of the values for Material. This has the effect of adding an
additional level of detail for Storage Location to the analysis.

Figure 234: Keep Filter

568 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

You can select as filter value directly from the results area of an executed report.
To do this, you could position the cursor on the filter value required, and choose
Keep Filter Value from the context menu. The filter value is then displayed in
the report and the report results are restricted to the filter value in questions. Or
you could as the graphic shows simply drag the characteristic value you want to
use as a filter to the right side of the navigation area and drop it. The value will
automatically be used as a filter for the analysis.

Figure 235: Best Practice - Business Content

SAP Best Practices for Business Intelligence supports the fast and smooth
implementation of predefined scenarios that handle the most important business
requirements in the area of Business Intelligence.
The Business Content includes reporting models for SAP standard business
processes and support them out of the box.
To meet your requirements Business Content objects can be installed, altered
and enhanced easily with the objects needed. By using the Business Content
implementation time can be reduced significant.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 569



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

570 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

Exercise 16:
Exercise Objectives
After completing this exercise, you will be able to:
ï Create a query for BEx
ï Explore standard navigation possibilities within a query

Business Example
You have joined the project team that is implementing the SAP BI solution at
International Oil Company. As the employee responsible for query definition, you
need to familiarize yourself with the tools available for query definition.

Task:
Query definition and query navigation are recorded demos available via
ITutor-Sessions. Please call a session and follow the instructions given by the
avatar teacher.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 571



Unit 9: Analytics with SAP Business Intelligence IOG100

Solution 16:
Task:
Query definition and query navigation are recorded demos available via
ITutor-Sessions. Please call a session and follow the instructions given by the
avatar teacher.

572 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Lesson: Bulk Supply Chain Reporting and Analytics

Lesson Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Describe the architecture and major components of the SAP BI architecture
ï Describe the reporting features available to support end users
ï Describe oil and gas business scenarios available out of the box for SAP

Business Intelligence

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 573



Unit Summary IOG100

Unit Summary
You should now be able to:
ï Describe the architecture and major components of the SAP BI architecture
ï Describe the reporting features available to support end users
ï Describe oil and gas business scenarios available out of the box for SAP

Business Intelligence

574 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



IOG100 Course Summary

Course Summary
You should now be able to:

ï Explain the realization in SAP for OIL&GAS basic functions of Supply,
Transmission & Trading and Refining.

ï Understand the purpose and assignment of enterprise structures required
for processing documents

ï Create and process the documents used in the various industry business
scenarios.

ï Create and maintain all relevant master data.
ï Execute and change layout of basic reports and lists relevant to business

scenarios.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 575



Course Summary IOG100

576 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 2006 / Q2



Feedback
SAP AG has made every effort in the preparation of this course to ensure the
accuracy and completeness of the materials. If you have any corrections or
suggestions for improvement, please record them in the appropriate place in the
course evaluation.

2006 / Q2 © 2007 SAP AG. All rights reserved. 577